233 	 Přehledové 	studie	 /Československá psychologie 2022 / ročník LXVI / číslo 3
DOI: 10.51561/cspsych.66.3.233
SIGNING UP IS NOT YET MINDFULNESS PRACTICE: 
A	SYSTEMATIC	REVIEW 	OF	ADHERENCE	 TO	eHEALTH	
AND mHEALTH MINDFULNESS-BASED PROGRAMS 
IN THE PRE-PANDEMIC PERIOD
SIMONA LIPT ÁKOVÁ1, MIROSLA V SVĚTLÁK2,3, ROMAN HYTYCH1, JURAJ MATIS4, 
ALENA SLEZ ÁČKOVÁ2,4, RASTISLA V ŠUMEC2,5
1Faculty of Social Studies, Masaryk University, Brno, 
2Department of Psychology and Psychosomatics, Faculty of
Social Studies, Masaryk University, Brno, 
2Department of Psychology and Psychosomatics, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno 
3Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital Brno and Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk 
University, Brno 
4Department of Psychology, Faculty of Arts, Masaryk University, Brno 
5First Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University and St. Anne’ s 
University Hospital, Brno
Submitted: 25. 4. 2021; M. S., Department of Psychology and Psychosomatics,
Hospital, Brno
Submitted: 25. 4. 2021; M. S., Department of Psychology and Psychosomatics, Faculty of Medicine, 
Masaryk University, Kamenice 126/3, 625 00 Brno; e-mail: msvetlak@med.muni.cz
This research was supported by the Ministry of Health of the CR / Ministry of Health Research 
Programme 2020–2026, project no. NU22-09-00056 and Masaryk University / Specific research – 
support for student projects project no. (MUNI/A/1126/2021).
We thank all the authors of reviewed studies for their
projects project no. (MUNI/A/1126/2021).
We thank all the authors of reviewed studies for their research efforts in developing knowledge in 
this area.ABSTRACT
Information and communication technology are 
promising channels in delivering the mindful -
ness-based intervention. A common problem in 
these interventions is the lack of study of treat -
ment adherence. The current article summarizes 
the state of measuring and reporting adherence, 
the rate of adherence, and possible predictors of
the state of measuring and reporting adherence, 
the rate of adherence, and possible predictors of 
adherence in the form of a systematic review 
following the PRISMA statement. A database 
search of PubMed, Web of Science, Medline, 
Scopus, and PsychINFO identified 3104 poten -
tially relevant articles published up to the end of 
December 2019. The review focuses only on the 
SARS-CoV-2 pre-pandemic time because the 
accelerated development of the eHealth Mind -
fulness-based interventions and
time because the 
accelerated development of the eHealth Mind -
fulness-based interventions and a vast amount 
of newly published interventions in the follow -
ing years was expected. A total of 69 studies met 
all the eligibility criteria. Out of these studies, 
61% reported some measure of adherence and 
36% reported the adherence rate. The adherence 
rate in clinical populations ranged from 41% to 92%; in non-clinical populations, it ranged from 
1% to 85%. Predictors of adherence were inves
to 92%; in non-clinical populations, it ranged from 
1% to 85%. Predictors of adherence were inves -
tigated in 48% of the studies; however, the ma -
jority of assessed variables had mixed findings 
about predicting adherence. There was a huge 
variety in the definitions and measurements of 
adherence. A standardized system of measuring 
and reporting adherence and further investiga -
tion of its predictors is needed.
key words:
mindfulness, 
adherence, 
online technology, 
eHealth,
of its predictors is needed.
key words:
mindfulness, 
adherence, 
online technology, 
eHealth, 
mHealth
klíčová slova:
mindfulness, 
adherence, 
online technologie, 
eHealth, 
mHealth
1 INTRODUCTION
In the last two decades, information and communication technology have been rapidly 
incorporated into traditional healthcare practices in the form of eHealth and mHealth 
approaches in the area of mental and physical health (Andersson, 2018). According to 
Eysenbach (2001, para. 3), eHealth refers
and physical health (Andersson, 2018). According to 
Eysenbach (2001, para. 3), eHealth refers to “health services and information deliv -
ered or enhanced through the Internet and related technologies. In a broader sense, the 
term characterizes not only a technical development, but also a state-of-mind, a way 234 / Přehledové 	studieof thinking, an attitude, and a commitment for networked, global thinking, to improve 
health care locally, regionally, and worldwide by using information and
global thinking, to improve 
health care locally, regionally, and worldwide by using information and communica -
tion technology.” Later, the term was broadened to include mHealth, adding mobile 
phones and applications (apps) to the definition (Naslund et al., 2015). 
There is increasing evidence that eHealth and mHealth programs and interventions 
are effective, for instance in smoking cessation (V ogel et al., 2019), insomnia reduc -
tion (Werner-Seidler et al., 2018), reduced chronic pain
(V ogel et al., 2019), insomnia reduc -
tion (Werner-Seidler et al., 2018), reduced chronic pain (Buhrman et al., 2016), al -
leviation of generalized anxiety disorder symptoms (Richards et al., 2015), increased 
management of behavior of adults with type 2 diabetes (Dack et al., 2019), stress 
reduction (Asplund et al., 2018), and depressive symptom management in older adults 
(Harerimana et al., 2019).
A recent meta-analysis (Carlbring et al., 2018) comparing internet-based cognitive 
behavior
2019).
A recent meta-analysis (Carlbring et al., 2018) comparing internet-based cognitive 
behavior therapy (ICBT) with face-to-face cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) in vari -
ous psychiatric and somatic conditions revealed a pooled effect size at post-treatment 
of Hedges g=.05 which clearly suggests equivalent overall effects. The important link 
is a finding showing evidence that ICBT can be as effective as other treatment formats 
while being more cost-effective (Donker et al., 2015). In the
effective as other treatment formats 
while being more cost-effective (Donker et al., 2015). In the context of increasing 
pressure on healthcare budgets across the world, approaches are sought that are effec -
tive, with minimal economic costs and maximum selected population impact (Donker 
et al., 2015). 
In this context, there is a massive expectation from eHealth mainly because of the 
media hype about it. eHealth seems to offer a solution for everything, but unfortu -
nately, the paradox is
about it. eHealth seems to offer a solution for everything, but unfortu -
nately, the paradox is that little has been scientifically substantiated. We are still at the 
beginning of answering the questions for whom, with what kind of suffering, in what 
period of life and disease, and at what readiness to change unhealthy behavior and 
regulate emotions eHealth is the best tool. We have increasing evidence that eHealth 
solutions are helpful. However, it must be noted that they are only one of
evidence that eHealth 
solutions are helpful. However, it must be noted that they are only one of many other 
tools in the repertoire of the experienced clinician or clinical psychologist. eHealth is 
not the tool for everybody, and health care professionals need to be careful when they 
indicate it.
Mindfulness-based	 programs
While most of the programs mentioned above are based on CBT, recent studies show 
that mindfulness-based programs (MBPs), most often based on or derived from mind
studies show 
that mindfulness-based programs (MBPs), most often based on or derived from mind -
fulness-based stress reduction (MBSR; Kabat-Zinn, 1982) and mindfulness-based 
cognitive therapy (MBCT; Segal et al., 2002), the MBPs most used in clinical practice 
(Didonna, 2009), also represent suitable, well-structured, and effective approaches 
convertible to eHealth and mHealth programs. 
From the first article published by Kabat-Zinn (1982) about the positive effect of 
MBSR on pain reduction
first article published by Kabat-Zinn (1982) about the positive effect of 
MBSR on pain reduction and symptoms of negative mood in a group of patients 
with chronic pain, the effectiveness of mindfulness-based interventions on improving 
mental and physical health has been repeatedly documented in healthy people (Keng 
et al., 2011; Tomlinson et al., 2018) and in people with various psychiatric or somatic 
conditions (Goldberg et al., 2018; Rahimi-Ardabili et al., 2018). 
The eHealth and mHealth
somatic 
conditions (Goldberg et al., 2018; Rahimi-Ardabili et al., 2018). 
The eHealth and mHealth format of mindfulness-based programs (eMBPs) have 
been documented to be effective in supporting mental health and reducing psychopa -
thology symptoms in patients with cancer (Kubo et al., 2019; Zernicke et al., 2014), 
in healthy subjects (Cavanagh et al., 2018; Querstret et al., 2018), and in patients with 
depression (Lappalainen et al., 2015), anxiety (Krusche et al., 2013), tinnitus (Hesser
with 
depression (Lappalainen et al., 2015), anxiety (Krusche et al., 2013), tinnitus (Hesser 
et al., 2012), chronic pain (Dowd et al., 2015), and fibromyalgia (Davis & Zautra, 235 	 Přehledové 	studie	 /2013). A recent meta-analysis and systematic reviews proved that eMBPs have a sig -
nificant impact on depression, anxiety, well-being, mindfulness, and stress (Cavanagh 
et al., 2018; Fish et al., 2016; Spijkerman et al., 2016).
By excluding face-to-face contact with an experienced mindfulness
2016; Spijkerman et al., 2016).
By excluding face-to-face contact with an experienced mindfulness teacher, low -
ering costs, and enhancing accessibility and flexibility, eMBPs have the potential to 
deliver the benefits of mindfulness meditation programs to large groups of previously 
inaccessible participants. It is clear that these interventions can be popular, as com -
mercial mindfulness websites and mobile apps (e.g. Headspace, Calm, Buddhify) are 
rapidly gaining public interest (Fish et
and mobile apps (e.g. Headspace, Calm, Buddhify) are 
rapidly gaining public interest (Fish et al., 2016). Online programs (1) are easily ac -
cessible; (2) are anonymous; (3) are available to people during the course of their 
daily life; (4) do not necessarily require the involvement of a therapist educated in 
mindfulness; (5) are less expensive; and (6) save time (Andersson & Cuijpers, 2009; 
Andersson & Titov, 2014; Spijkerman et al., 2016). Almost half of the people in one 
study would
Andersson & Titov, 2014; Spijkerman et al., 2016). Almost half of the people in one 
study would prefer an online format of mindfulness meditation intervention to a face-
to-face format (Wahbeh et al., 2014). The preference for online delivery is reflected 
in the increasing number of mindfulness-based mobile apps; a search identified 560 
available apps (Mani et al., 2015). 
1.2	Adherence
Even though eMBPs are repeatedly referred to as effective and beneficial for many rea -
sons,
though eMBPs are repeatedly referred to as effective and beneficial for many rea -
sons, effectiveness is only part of the story and it can be influenced by many factors. One 
common methodological problem is that programs are effective for people who stay in 
them (Van Dam et al., 2018) but what of those who drop out? It is evident that health 
outcomes cannot be accurately assessed if they are measured predominantly by resource 
utilization indicators and efficacy of interventions (WHO, 2003).
predominantly by resource 
utilization indicators and efficacy of interventions (WHO, 2003). In this context, one of 
the fundamental characteristics and methodical challenges in the evaluation of eHealth 
and mHealth apps is thus the phenomenon of participants stopping usage and/or being 
lost to follow-up, termed “the law of attrition” by Eysenbach (2005). Eysenbach argues 
that nonusage data should be of great interest to researchers, as research describing pat -
terns and predictors for
should be of great interest to researchers, as research describing pat -
terns and predictors for attrition and non-adherence offer information about treatment 
itself as well as data on system usability. According to his proposal, attrition can be split 
into two different processes: dropout attrition, or the phenomenon of losing participants 
to follow-up, and nonusage attrition, or the proportion of participant who do not drop 
out (e.g., they still fill in questionnaires), but who are no
of participant who do not drop 
out (e.g., they still fill in questionnaires), but who are no longer following the program. 
In other words, they are non-adherent. Adherence is defined as the extent to which an in -
dividual follows a treatment regimen as outlined by the treatment program. The term is 
related to compliance and is often used interchangeably (APA Dictionary of Psychology, 
n.d.). Adherence is the single most important modifiable factor influencing treatment 
outcome (WHO, 2003).
Adherence is the single most important modifiable factor influencing treatment 
outcome (WHO, 2003). Adherence to long-term therapy for chronic somatic or mental 
illnesses in developed countries averages 50% (WHO, 2003). 
1.3	Investigation	 of	adherence
No single measurement strategy has been deemed optimal, and there is no “gold stand -
ard” for measuring adherence behavior. Multi-method approaches combining feasible 
self-reporting (e.g. standardized, patient-administered questionnaires;
combining feasible 
self-reporting (e.g. standardized, patient-administered questionnaires; Morisky et al., 
1986), assessment of adherence behaviors (e.g. a medication event monitoring system 
that records the time and date when a medication container was opened; Cramer & 
Mattson, 1991), and biochemical measurements in blood or urine are the best for de -
scribing how patients take their medications. Reasonable objective measures are the 
current state-of-the-art in measurement of adherence
Reasonable objective measures are the 
current state-of-the-art in measurement of adherence behavior (WHO, 2003). 236 / Přehledové 	studieIn the context of eHealth and mHealth interventions, adherence is the extent to 
which individuals experience the content of the program, expressed in website usage, 
number of logins, number of modules/sessions completed, time meditated, exercises/
quizzes completed, diary entries, phone calls, etc. (Christensen et al., 2009). Another 
similar term is
completed, diary entries, phone calls, etc. (Christensen et al., 2009). Another 
similar term is completion rate, which can be understood as a positive opposite of 
dropout rate or attrition, implying the proportion of individuals successfully complet -
ing an intervention (Baer, 2003). 
Three general approaches are used to investigate the possible predictors of adher -
ence, which are described by Christensen et al. (2009) as (1) statistical analysis to 
establish associations between adherence
Christensen et al. (2009) as (1) statistical analysis to 
establish associations between adherence and different factors, (2) post-test question -
naires to obtain retrospective analyses of participant’s perception of the intervention, 
usability measures, and possible obstacles to completing the treatment, and (3) experi -
mental manipulation of variables believed to be causal in increasing adherence. The 
first strategy is probably the most frequent, as it does not require ad hoc preparation.
The 
first strategy is probably the most frequent, as it does not require ad hoc preparation. 
Among the most common factors to study are characteristics of respondents (person -
ality and demographic measures), which have been shown to have small but signifi -
cant predictive value for adherence (Christensen et al., 2009; Kelders et al., 2013). In 
trials on clinical populations specifically, disease-specific effects can be assessed as 
possible predictors, with a high level of emotional
disease-specific effects can be assessed as 
possible predictors, with a high level of emotional distress leading to early dropout 
(Davis & Addis, 1999). The most promising predictors so far are unique variables as -
sociated with online delivery, such as special characteristics of the treatment program 
(duration, peer/therapist interaction, reminders, content, mode of delivery, type of me -
dia used, etc.) (Kelders et al., 2012). 
Despite its significance, the adherence measure is often
-
dia used, etc.) (Kelders et al., 2012). 
Despite its significance, the adherence measure is often missing generally and spe -
cifically from eMBP studies. While attrition has become almost a stable report, adher -
ence is often either underreported, omitted, or not studied at all. Many authors have 
expressed the necessity to investigate adherence and its possible predictors to further 
develop the field of mindfulness interventions administered online (see Fish et al., 
2016; Jayewardene et
the field of mindfulness interventions administered online (see Fish et al., 
2016; Jayewardene et al., 2017; Spijkerman et al., 2016). Donkin and her team (2011), 
who conducted a systematic review of the impact of adherence on the effectiveness 
of e-therapies, put together a list of methods for measuring adherence to e-therapy, 
including program logins, module completion, time spent online, completion of a 
predefined activity, posts made, pages viewed, replies to emails, forum visits, use
completion of a 
predefined activity, posts made, pages viewed, replies to emails, forum visits, use of 
online tools, self-reported completion of offline activities, and print requests made. 
Understanding and describing the patterns and predictors for attrition represent a fun -
damental condition for developing effective eHealth mindfulness interventions with 
high population impact. 
1.4	Summary
While systematic reviews documenting the significant impact of eMBPs on positive 
mental and
systematic reviews documenting the significant impact of eMBPs on positive 
mental and somatic health outcomes have been done (Cavanagh et al., 2018; Fish et 
al., 2016; Spijkerman et al., 2016), a similar review on adherence to these programs is 
still missing. The aim of this paper is to systematically review (1) if the adherence to 
eMBPs is measured, (2) by which methods, (3) the prevalence of attrition and adher -
ence, and (4) the adherence predictors. 
This should serve as a starting
of attrition and adher -
ence, and (4) the adherence predictors. 
This should serve as a starting point for maximizing effectiveness and adherence 
and minimizing attrition rates in the construction and development of future online 
eMBP programs for patients with any medical condition affected by mindfulness. 237 	 Přehledové 	studie	 /2 METHOD
This review was conducted according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic 
Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement (Moher et al.,
Reporting Items for Systematic 
Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement (Moher et al., 2009).
2.1	Eligibility 	criteria
This systematic review is limited to studies of eMBPs with the aim of studying ad -
herence. Relatively broad inclusion criteria were constructed to allow for a synoptic 
overview of the subject rather than a partial analysis. 
The criteria for study inclusion were as follows: (1) the study intervention must 
be based on mindfulness principles, (2) the mindfulness
as follows: (1) the study intervention must 
be based on mindfulness principles, (2) the mindfulness intervention must be deliv -
ered through technology with no more than one face-to-face session, (3) the research 
intended to assess the effect of the intervention, and (4) the paper must be written in 
English. Exclusion criteria were: (1) failure to meet inclusion criteria and (2) study 
had a descriptive rather than exploratory character. In addition, only peer-reviewed 
published articles
a descriptive rather than exploratory character. In addition, only peer-reviewed 
published articles were included.
2.2	Search	strategy
A comprehensive search of relevant literature was conducted up to December 31, 
2019. Five databases (PubMed, Web of Science, Medline, Scopus, and PsychINFO) 
were searched for relevant keywords. Three major keyword themes were used: (1) 
“mindfulness” (2) “technology” and (3) “adherence/attrition.” For each construct, 
several relevant or synonymous keywords
and (3) “adherence/attrition.” For each construct, 
several relevant or synonymous keywords were used to account for variability in ex -
pression and to ensure broad coverage of the subject (see Appendix 1 for the full 
search strings). Following this search strategy, 3104 studies were identified (see Fig -
ure 1 for the full flow diagram of article selection).
2.3	Data	extraction
The study selection was made in four steps. Three researchers (SL, MS, JM) partici -
pated in the whole process to
was made in four steps. Three researchers (SL, MS, JM) partici -
pated in the whole process to ensure the validity of the procedure. First, as multiple 
databases were used to conduct the search, duplicates were removed through End -
Note (www.endnote.com). Second, titles were screened for eligibility, and studies on 
clearly different subjects were omitted. Third, abstracts were screened for eligibility, 
and studies that did not meet the inclusion criteria were omitted. Fourth, the full texts
and studies that did not meet the inclusion criteria were omitted. Fourth, the full texts 
of the studies were assessed for the final selection of studies eligible for this review. In 
cases where the suitability of a study came into question during one of the steps, it was 
included in the next step. Any disagreements between the researchers were discussed, 
and studies were included or omitted only if agreement was reached on all sides. 
Necessary data were extracted manually. Only
or omitted only if agreement was reached on all sides. 
Necessary data were extracted manually. Only information included in published 
available papers were included. In some studies, supporting documents available for 
download on the journal or database website were used to obtain supporting data. 
There was no contact with study authors. Information such as time commitment, 
adherence rate, and attrition percentage were calculated manually if possible, from 
available data if not listed
and attrition percentage were calculated manually if possible, from 
available data if not listed explicitly in the study articles. Any missing or unclear data 
were marked as such. 
2.4	Assessment 	of	quality
The quality of the included studies was assessed to ensure that the studies supporting 
treatment efficacy were sound. Five criteria for empirically supported psychothera -
pies outlined by Chambless and Hollon (1998) were applied: (1) appropriate study 
design with comparison condition,
Chambless and Hollon (1998) were applied: (1) appropriate study 
design with comparison condition, (2) adequate sample size (defined as a minimum of 238 / Přehledové 	studien ≥ 25 participants per group), (3) specified target population and inclusion criteria, 
(4) utilization of reliable/valid outcome measures (defined as applying instruments 
that have demonstrated reliability and validity in previous research), and (5) appropri -
ate data analysis (defined as addressing missing data/using
previous research), and (5) appropri -
ate data analysis (defined as addressing missing data/using appropriate intention-to-
treat analyses).
2.5	Analysis
Meta-analysis was not considered appropriate for the study objectives. This approach 
was used because the investigation of eMBPs in clinical and non-clinical populations 
is still in its early stages (predominantly in stage 1; Dimidjian & Segal, 2015) accord -
ing to the National Institutes of Health Stage Model (Onken et al., 2014), as
Segal, 2015) accord -
ing to the National Institutes of Health Stage Model (Onken et al., 2014), as nearly 
half of the programs in this review included intervention generation, refinement, mod -
ification, adaptation, and pilot testing, whereas efficacy results are reported only in a 
preliminary manner. Thus, there is a small number of RCT studies per outcome and 
generally high heterogeneity across all included studies–study characteristics (design, 
intervention type, delivery modes,
across all included studies–study characteristics (design, 
intervention type, delivery modes, measured outcomes, and assessment timepoints) 
varied substantially, and homogeneity in effects cannot be expected with standard 
meta-analytical methods.
The findings are summarized using a narrative approach, and we have focused on a 
detailed description of high-quality studies in the results and conclusions.
2.5.1 Coding of study characteristics
The following study characteristics were coded. For a
Coding of study characteristics
The following study characteristics were coded. For a summary of respective charac -
teristics, see Table 1 on https://upp.med.muni.cz/en/supplements/2022 .
2.5.2 Authors and date
For compendious reporting, study authors were recorded with the study publication 
date in the form of an in-text citation. Respective studies are further addressed in this 
way.
2.5.3 Intervention
Mode of delivery (web, mobile app, or podcast) was recorded with information about
Intervention
Mode of delivery (web, mobile app, or podcast) was recorded with information about 
facilitator interaction or absence thereof and the way the facilitator was included in 
the intervention. This presence could be in the form of an introductory face-to-face 
meeting, asynchronous or synchronous guidance, email or telephone support, group 
support, or feedback. Any reward for study participation or study completion was 
included in this section.
2.5.4 Participants
Population
study participation or study completion was 
included in this section.
2.5.4 Participants
Population characteristics and sample size were recorded. The sample size is split in 
intervention group or groups, which are then defined. Control group size is reported 
in the case of randomized controlled trials (report style adapted from Christensen et 
al., 2009).
2.5.5 Program
Distinctive characteristics of the program used in each study were recorded. The in -
formation includes the duration of the
of the program used in each study were recorded. The in -
formation includes the duration of the program, the type of intervention the trial was 
based on, required time commitment, and whether reminders were present and in what 
way they were utilized. 239 	 Přehledové 	studie	 /2.5.6 Follow-through
Information about study adherence and attrition was retrieved. Adherence was re -
ported in the percentage of participants following the treatment as prescribed. If the 
study did not disclose these
of participants following the treatment as prescribed. If the 
study did not disclose these statistics, it was reported as such, and additional informa -
tion about usage was provided if accessible. Attrition was reported in the percentage 
of participants failing to complete measurements after randomization was done. If 
possible, predictors of participant dropout or adherence were mentioned and recorded.
3 RESULTS
3.1	Study	selection
A PRISMA Flow diagram (see Figure 1) demonstrates the
and recorded.
3 RESULTS
3.1	Study	selection
A PRISMA Flow diagram (see Figure 1) demonstrates the process of a study eligibility 
review. An initial database search identified 3104 studies which was narrowed down to 
1728 after duplicates were removed. After a title screen, 1289 studies were excluded, 
clearly on a subject irrelevant to this review. Further, 18 studies were excluded after 
a full-text assessment. Of these, three did not meet the “mindfulness-based” criterion, 
ten failed to meet
assessment. Of these, three did not meet the “mindfulness-based” criterion, 
ten failed to meet “technology-delivered with no more than one face-to-face session” 
criterion, two were not written in English, and two were not peer-reviewed. This led 
to a total of 69 studies being included in the final systematic review .
3.2	Study	characteristics
The 69 interventions that were included in the systematic review are described, with 
all the characteristics, in Table 1. Overall, 24 interventions
review are described, with 
all the characteristics, in Table 1. Overall, 24 interventions targeted improving mental 
health after mental or somatic clinical conditions. General mental health improvement 
in the non-clinical population was targeted the most often, in 43 interventions. Finally, 
two interventions targeted lifestyle behavior improvement. Study publication dates 
range from the beginning of 2013 to the end of December 2020. 
3.2.1 Intervention and participants
In terms of the mode
of 2013 to the end of December 2020. 
3.2.1 Intervention and participants
In terms of the mode of delivery, 50 study interventions were primarily web-based, 
15 were delivered through a mobile phone app, one used a combination of web-based 
and mobile phone apps (Puolakanaho et al., 2019), one was delivered via email (Hala -
mová et al., 2018), one via videoconferencing (Khazaeili et al., 2019), and one was 
delivered through a podcast medium (Toole & Craighead, 2016). 
There were 49
2019), and one was 
delivered through a podcast medium (Toole & Craighead, 2016). 
There were 49 interventions without any means of facilitation, and the rest had 
some kind of synchronous or asynchronous support method. Nine included an intro -
ductory session on explaining mindfulness principles or technology used in the inter -
vention, or both, and 11 had a facilitator supporting the whole intervention. 
In 22 interventions, there was a reward for study participation. Participant count
intervention. 
In 22 interventions, there was a reward for study participation. Participant count 
ranged from 15 in feasibility trials and pilot studies (19% of studies) to 2081 in rand -
omized controlled trials (81%). Populations included a variety of clinical conditions 
and countries (Europe, North America, and Asia).
3.2.2 Program
Program length ranged from 1 week (Toole & Craighead, 2016) to 12 weeks (Hoff -
mann et al., 2018; Younge et al., 2015). Most trials used a specific MBP (39%),
to 12 weeks (Hoff -
mann et al., 2018; Younge et al., 2015). Most trials used a specific MBP (39%), ACT 
and trials combining various programs were both represented in 20% of studies, 27% 
of trials utilized an MBSR program, and 9% of trials based the intervention on MBCT. 
Time commitment fluctuated from 100 minutes (Howells et al., 2016) to 27 hours 
(Bruggeman Everts et al., 2015), with 59% of studies having unclear information 240 / Přehledové 	studieabout the total time commitment. The
of studies having unclear information 240 / Přehledové 	studieabout the total time commitment. The frequency, duration, and characteristics of in -
formal practice were unclear in most of the studies. Reminders to practice were used 
in most studies (59%).Figure 1 PRISMA flow diagram of mindfulness-based technology-delivered studies 
 241 	 Přehledové 	studie	 /3.2.3 Methodological quality
A full summary of the methodological quality of the included studies based on the five 
criteria defined by
summary of the methodological quality of the included studies based on the five 
criteria defined by Chambless and Hollon (1998) can be seen in Table 2 on https://upp.
med.muni.cz/en/supplements/2022 . From all the included studies, 37 (54%) met all 
five research design criteria. More specifically, 52 (75%) studies utilized appropriate 
control conditions, 57 (83%) had an adequate sample size and clearly identified inclu -
sion criteria, 65 (94%) studies used valid and reliable measurement
and clearly identified inclu -
sion criteria, 65 (94%) studies used valid and reliable measurement instruments, and 
62 (90%) used appropriate data analysis.
4 MAIN OUTCOMES
4.1	Adherence
Out of 69 studies, 23% (16 studies) did not report any statistics of adherence at all. 
In total, 61% of studies reported some measure of adherence. Adherence rate was re -
ported on 36% of studies. There were 27% of studies that did not report the percentage 
of participants who adhered to treatment as
were 27% of studies that did not report the percentage 
of participants who adhered to treatment as prescribed but offered a related statistic 
about program usage (usage time, number of logins, activity log completion, number 
of diary entries, reading reminder emails, messages or phone calls to facilitator) or 
engagement (number of sessions completed, practice time, informal practice time, 
frequency of practice, course completion time). The adherence rate in clinical popula -
tions ranged
of practice, course completion time). The adherence rate in clinical popula -
tions ranged from 41% (Scott et al., 2018) to 92% (Cox et al., 2018); in non-clinical 
populations from 1% (Antonson et al., 2018) to 85% (Levin et al., 2013). 
4.2	Attrition
Information about dropout attrition was included in 90% of studies. The attrition rate 
in clinical populations ranged from 2% (Trompetter et al., 2014) to 47% (Dimidjian 
et al., 2014); in non-clinical populations from 8% (Levin et al., 2013) to
2014) to 47% (Dimidjian 
et al., 2014); in non-clinical populations from 8% (Levin et al., 2013) to 88% (Mak 
et al., 2017).
4.3	Predictors	 of	adherence
Of all studies, 33 (48%) investigated possible predictors of adherence or completion 
of the program.
4.3.1 Demographic/personal predictors
Age (Bostock et al., 2018; Krusche et al., 2018), and higher age notably (Kvillemo et 
al., 2016; Mattila et al. 2016; Montero-Marin et al., 2018;), was found to be a predic -
tor of treatment adherence and
et al. 2016; Montero-Marin et al., 2018;), was found to be a predic -
tor of treatment adherence and completion in five (7.2%) studies, but the results of the 
study by Krusche et al. (2013) do not support this predictor.
Gender (female in particular) was mentioned in three (4.4%) studies (Bruggeman 
Everts et al., 2015; Mattila et al., 2016; Trompetter et al., 2014); Kvillemo et al. (2016) 
found no significant difference in gender between completers and non-completers. In 
accordance with this
no significant difference in gender between completers and non-completers. In 
accordance with this trend, the data presented by Puolakanaho et al. (2018) docu -
mented that dropouts were mostly male. 
Higher education (tertiary education specifically) was found to be a predictor of 
treatment adherence and completion in three (4.4%) studies (Bruggeman Everts et al., 
2015; Galante et al., 2016; Stjernswärd & Hansson, 2018); it was not a predictor in 
one study (Kvillemo et al.,
et al., 2016; Stjernswärd & Hansson, 2018); it was not a predictor in 
one study (Kvillemo et al., 2016).
Unemployment was mentioned as a significant positive predictor in three (4.4%) 
studies (Galante et al., 2016; Montero-Marin et al., 2018; Scott et al., 2018); Galante 
et al. (2016) found the same true for participants working part-time; and three (4.4%) 242 / Přehledové 	studieother studies failed to find this predictor significant (Bostock et al., 2018; Bruggeman 
Everts et al., 2015;
failed to find this predictor significant (Bostock et al., 2018; Bruggeman 
Everts et al., 2015; Kvillemo et al., 2016).
Other personal predictors that were found to be significant in relationship to adher -
ence were using sleeping medication (Bruggeman Everts et al., 2015), having previ -
ous experience with mindfulness, yoga, or other mind-body techniques (Bruggeman 
Everts et al., 2015; Krusche et al., 2018; Mak et al., 2017; Montero-Marin et al., 
2018), knowing about the study from
Krusche et al., 2018; Mak et al., 2017; Montero-Marin et al., 
2018), knowing about the study from personal contacts (Galante et al., 2016), owning 
a smartphone prior to the study (Mattila et al., 2016), and not being in a stable rela -
tionship (Montero-Marin et al., 2018).
In total, 17 (24.6%) studies found no association with any demographic meas -
ures in terms of study adherence and/or treatment completion in baseline variables 
(Cavanagh et al., 2013; Cavanagh et al., 2018; Davis et al.,
completion in baseline variables 
(Cavanagh et al., 2013; Cavanagh et al., 2018; Davis et al., 2013; Eriksson et al., 
2018; Forbes et al., 2018; Gu et al., 2018; Krusche et al., 2013; Kvillemo et al., 2016; 
Morledge et al., 2013; Murray et al., 2015; Nguyen-Feng et al., 2017; Nissen et al., 
2020; Shore et al., 2018; Trompetter et al., 2014; Querstret et al., 2017; Querstret et 
al., 2018; Wahbeh et al., 2016). 
4.3.2 Psychological predictors
A positive relationship with adherence was found in
et al., 2016). 
4.3.2 Psychological predictors
A positive relationship with adherence was found in Forbes et al. (2018), where con -
scientiousness and baseline mindfulness were found to be significant predictors, but 
neuroticism was not associated with it in any way. Galante et al. (2016) also found that 
lower stress levels from baseline predicted study retention.
A link to non-adherence was found to be tied to depression (Bruggeman Everts et 
al., 2015), as well as lower baseline mental
found to be tied to depression (Bruggeman Everts et 
al., 2015), as well as lower baseline mental well-being, energy, and treatment expec -
tancy (Mak et al., 2017).
In total, 12 (17.4%) studies did not find any association between psychological pre -
dictors and adherence and/or treatment completion (Antonson et al., 2018; Cavanagh 
et al., 2013; Cavanagh et al., 2018; Davis et al., 2015; Krusche et al., 2013; Morledge 
et al., 2013; Murray et al., 2015; Nguyen-Feng et al., 2017; Trompetter et
et al., 2013; Morledge 
et al., 2013; Murray et al., 2015; Nguyen-Feng et al., 2017; Trompetter et al., 2014; 
Querstret et al., 2017; Querstret et al., 2018; Wahbeh et al., 2016).
4.4	Intervention	 characteristics	 and	mode	of	delivery	predictors
Five studies (7.2%) assessed predictors about the intervention or the mode of delivery. 
Allexandre et al. (2016) found that group practice enhanced adherence. The results of 
the study by Cox et al. (2018) indicate that delivery through telephone
adherence. The results of 
the study by Cox et al. (2018) indicate that delivery through telephone calls had better 
adherence and retention than a self-directed mobile mindfulness program. Diary us -
ers were also found to have a higher course completion rate (Galante et al., 2016), as 
were participants who used the app more actively (Mattila et al., 2016). Krusche et al. 
(2013) did not find any significant differences amongst participants in relation to the 
course completion time.
5
find any significant differences amongst participants in relation to the 
course completion time.
5 DISCUSSION
This systematic review critically evaluated the current literature on eMBPs with the 
goal of assessing the state of measuring and reporting adherence to these programs, 
the levels of adherence to the intervention, and the possible predictors of adherence. 
The findings of this systematic review could contribute to a deeper understanding of 
the feasibility and effectiveness of eMBPs.
review could contribute to a deeper understanding of 
the feasibility and effectiveness of eMBPs. 243 	 Přehledové 	studie	 /5.1	Main	findings
5.1.1 The state of measuring and reporting adherence
After the initial search of databases, a total of 3104 studies found was reduced to the 
69 studies encompassed in this review. Out of the 69 studies included, 61% reported 
some statistics of adherence. Of those, 36% reported explicitly the percentage of par -
ticipants who adhered to treatment as
Of those, 36% reported explicitly the percentage of par -
ticipants who adhered to treatment as prescribed or offered a relative statistic from 
which the adherence rate was calculated, defined as target participation in the program 
and measured participation in the program, and 27% utilized a descriptive statistic 
about program usage (usage time, number of logins, activity log completion, number 
of diary entries, reading reminder emails, messages or phone calls to facilitator) or 
engagement
of diary entries, reading reminder emails, messages or phone calls to facilitator) or 
engagement (number of sessions completed, practice time, informal practice time, 
frequency of practice, course completion time) without the definition of what was 
considered as adherent or non-adherent participation. 
This finding is consistent with the systematic review by Donkin and his team 
(2011), who examined overall adherence in e-therapies. The number of studies re -
porting adherence was lower in
examined overall adherence in e-therapies. The number of studies re -
porting adherence was lower in their study (only 48% of 33 studies), and there was 
considerable variation in the reporting of adherence and its consequent analysis. The 
number of logins was the most prevalent measure of adherence, followed by the num -
ber of completed modules. The logins appeared to be the measure of adherence most 
consistently related to outcomes in physical health programs, while module comple -
tion was
most 
consistently related to outcomes in physical health programs, while module comple -
tion was found to be most related to outcomes in psychological health interventions. 
It is often unclear why certain measures of adherence were chosen over others, as a 
precise definition was missing from the assessed studies. 
There was also a high fluctuation in the terms used, such as completion (Bostock 
et al., 2018; Scott et al., 2018), engagement (Cavanagh et al., 2013), program usage 
(Kelson et
et al., 2018; Scott et al., 2018), engagement (Cavanagh et al., 2013), program usage 
(Kelson et al., 2017; Krieger et al., 2016; Levin et al., 2016; Mattila et al., 2016), com -
pliance (Lengacher et al., 2018), amount of exercise (Stjernswärd & Hansson, 2017), 
and attendance (Thompson et al., 2015). Such variation is likely to lead to mixed 
findings. In order to prevent a reporting bias and consequent inaccurate portrayal of 
adherence to the intervention, predefined criteria of what is
consequent inaccurate portrayal of 
adherence to the intervention, predefined criteria of what is considered adherent and 
non-adherent participation and an explanation for how it is measured need to be put 
in place. 
5.2	Rate	of	adherence
The adherence rate ranged from 41% to 92% in clinical populations and spread even 
more widely in non-clinical populations, from 1% to 85%. Such large variance is 
likely caused by great heterogeneity in the investigation of adherence. This finding 
is
is 
likely caused by great heterogeneity in the investigation of adherence. This finding 
is consistent with the average adherence of 50% found in web-based interventions 
(Kelders et al., 2012). As such, the findings clearly accentuate the need to concentrate 
more on adherence-related characteristics in these programs. When compared to the 
average adherence rate of face-to-face interventions, which ranges from 60% to 97% 
(Baer, 2003), the clearly lower rate suggests that it is difficult for
which ranges from 60% to 97% 
(Baer, 2003), the clearly lower rate suggests that it is difficult for many people to regu -
larly participate in a mindfulness program administered online. Although the format 
of digital delivery is very appealing in terms of cost reduction and increased access, 
given the low rates of adherence, it is important to consider factors that can predict 
the successful utilization of such interventions. Perhaps studies with high adherence 
reflect characteristics of
utilization of such interventions. Perhaps studies with high adherence 
reflect characteristics of the program or the intervention itself in that if they were to 
be applied more broadly, they would be able to counter for the non-adherence. Meas -
uring and reporting adherence is important to avoid methodological bias as well. Put 244 / Přehledové 	studiesimply, the omission of adherence may partly explain the overwhelmingly positive 
results of published studies: someone who has not benefited
explain the overwhelmingly positive 
results of published studies: someone who has not benefited may have skipped some 
of the exercises but still filled out the post-questionnaires. Therefore, studying adher -
ence could be one of the main focuses of feasibility studies right after studying the 
effectivity of an intervention per se.
Attrition was mentioned in 90% of studies, ranging from 2% to 47% in clinical 
populations and from 8% to 88% in non-clinical populations. Such widespread vari
to 47% in clinical 
populations and from 8% to 88% in non-clinical populations. Such widespread vari -
ation in attrition rates is not surprising, as similar results have been obtained before 
(Russell et al., 2018). The statistics were reported consistently in the form of attrition 
rates in all the studies that included it. As it is now known that participants who drop 
out can provide information that is as useful as those who complete the study, it has 
become a stable part of reporting
that is as useful as those who complete the study, it has 
become a stable part of reporting results of the intervention. Given that the physical 
and psychological outcomes of the intervention have been found to be negatively 
influenced by low adherence (Donkin et al., 2011), adherence deserves to be given 
the same attention in measuring and reporting as attrition now does. However, it is 
necessary to clearly distinguish between these two measures, as although they are 
supposedly similar,
to clearly distinguish between these two measures, as although they are 
supposedly similar, they map distinct information about participation. 
5.3	Predictors	 of	adherence
Out of all studies, only 48% included an investigation of possible predictors of adher -
ence in their analysis. Significant demographic predictors of increased adherence in -
cluded age, female gender, higher education, unemployment or part-time employment, 
using sleeping medication, previous experience with techniques
or part-time employment, 
using sleeping medication, previous experience with techniques similar to mindful -
ness, knowledge about the study from personal contacts, owning a smartphone prior 
to the study, and not being in a stable relationship. 
A closer look at the factors that predicted a higher level of adherence yielded in -
teresting findings. The three predictors that were mentioned and not refuted by other 
studies were age, gender, and education. On average, they were considered
and not refuted by other 
studies were age, gender, and education. On average, they were considered significant 
in only 7.2% of the studies. For age, previously both younger (Christensen et al., 
2009) and older age (Kvillemo et al., 2016; Mattila et al., 2016; Montero-Marin et 
al., 2018) have been shown to predict whether a participant will be adherent to the 
intervention. This seemingly discrepant finding may be explained by how age was 
operationalized in the included studies, meaning in
finding may be explained by how age was 
operationalized in the included studies, meaning in what ranges the age groups were 
defined. Therefore, the relationship between age and adherence may simply follow a 
normal distribution curve, with both younger adults and much older participants being 
more likely to adhere. 
Female gender was one of the clearest predictors related to adherence. This is 
consistent with findings from other online health interventions (Beatty & Binnion, 
2016; Wangberg
consistent with findings from other online health interventions (Beatty & Binnion, 
2016; Wangberg et al., 2008) and broader research on health behaviors indicating 
that women are more likely to engage in such interventions than men (Berrigan et al., 
2003). For men, higher adherence was found in face-to-face psychotherapy (Strauss 
et al., 2010), which suggests gender preference for different formats of psychological 
therapy.
Higher education specifically turned out to be positively
formats of psychological 
therapy.
Higher education specifically turned out to be positively associated with adherence 
in all studies that mentioned it, which provides further support for similar findings 
(Kelders et al., 2013). As it has been suggested that higher education predicts higher 
intervention uptake in the first place, this comes as no surprise (Waller & Gilbody, 
2008). However, it can be rather unstable as a sole predictor of adherence, as it was 
found to be insignificant in
it can be rather unstable as a sole predictor of adherence, as it was 
found to be insignificant in other systematic review on this topic (Beatty & Binnion, 
2016). 245 	 Přehledové 	studie	 /Needless to say, 24.6% of studies found no relationship at all between demographic 
variables and adherence. These sometimes-contradictory findings support the notion 
that while demographic factors are among the most common to be studied in relation 
to adherence, they have just a small predictive value
the most common to be studied in relation 
to adherence, they have just a small predictive value for adherence (Christensen et al., 
2009; Kelders et al., 2013). The same holds true for psychological predictors, where 
only 5.8% of the reviewed studies found any predictive value and each characteristic 
was mentioned uniquely, but 17.4% of the studies failed to recognize any significant 
relationship. Among some mentioned were conscientiousness, baselined mindfulness, 
and lower stress levels,
Among some mentioned were conscientiousness, baselined mindfulness, 
and lower stress levels, which were positively associated with adherence; depression, 
lower baseline mental well-being, energy, and treatment expectancy indicated an op -
posite relationship. All these characteristics were mentioned uniquely. While demo -
graphic and psychological factors might not have strong predicting power themselves, 
they have proven useful when controlled in subsequent levels of analysis (Forbes et
themselves, 
they have proven useful when controlled in subsequent levels of analysis (Forbes et 
al., 2018).
The last category of predictors, which was believed to be the most promising one in 
previous research (Kelders et al., 2012), is intervention characteristics and the mode 
of delivery predictors. Strikingly, only 7.2% of the studies assessed factors related 
to the intervention itself. Group practice, telephone call delivery, and a diary feature 
have been mentioned as significant
Group practice, telephone call delivery, and a diary feature 
have been mentioned as significant predictors; however, each of these factors have 
been mentioned only once. While many studies included features previously proven 
to enhance engagement, such as reminders (Webb et al., 2010), or some kind of social 
support, either from peers or a therapist (White, 2001), none of the studies mentioned 
them in their analysis of possible predictors. 
As most of the studies concentrated on the
them in their analysis of possible predictors. 
As most of the studies concentrated on the effectivity of the interventions them -
selves, the evaluation of predictors was not the main goal. Still, when determining 
where such studies are feasible, it is necessary to include an assessment of adherence. 
Given that only 42% of the studies included in this review assessed factors related to 
adherence in some way, the results are somewhat inconclusive and offer low support 
for any of the
adherence in some way, the results are somewhat inconclusive and offer low support 
for any of the predictors mentioned. While demographic variables that have been 
shown to have the lowest predictive values were studied most often, factors that have 
been shown to be the most influential in previous research, such as the ones related to 
the intervention and the mode of delivery, received almost no attention in analyses.
5.4	Methodology
The field of eMBP still has some limitations, mainly in
no attention in analyses.
5.4	Methodology
The field of eMBP still has some limitations, mainly in terms of methodological qual -
ity. Approximately half of the studies (54%) met the full criteria for appropriate re -
search design as defined by Chambless and Hollon (1998). Some of the studies relied 
on small sample sizes, limiting their ability to detect a statistically significant effect. 
However, some feasibility studies were included in the review, which might have 
influenced the result of
some feasibility studies were included in the review, which might have 
influenced the result of this criterion. The strongest asset was choosing valid and reli -
able measurement instruments, which was generally standard amongst the selected 
studies, except for only two. It is also important to note that the interventions assessed 
in this review varied in many intervention-related characteristics. Most of them were 
primarily web-based; one study assessed the mode of delivery as a potential
Most of them were 
primarily web-based; one study assessed the mode of delivery as a potential influence. 
Neither facilitator support, rewards for study participation, type of program, or even 
program length, which ranged from 1 week to 12 weeks, were assessed. The length 
of the intervention itself could account for variations in adherence, yet this was not 
investigated in any of the included studies. More research is required to determine 
the impact of these predictors on adherence to
studies. More research is required to determine 
the impact of these predictors on adherence to eMBP. A great deal of heterogeneity 
of study methodologies and definitions was also noted; the emerging field of eMBP 246 / Přehledové 	studiewould benefit from more consistency and uniformity in predefined terms. Despite its 
many positive benefits, mindfulness itself has received a lot of criticism due to its 
somewhat broad definition and methodological problems (see Hanley et al., 2016; 
van Dam
due to its 
somewhat broad definition and methodological problems (see Hanley et al., 2016; 
van Dam et al., 2018). Therefore, it is advisable to set and maintain high standards in 
mindfulness research. 
5.5	Limitations	 of	the	study
The coding eMBP included in this study was based on the descriptions in the pub -
lished literature. Although there was a deliberate effort to find all the information 
needed for systemization in this review, the coding was limited to the description 
of the
needed for systemization in this review, the coding was limited to the description 
of the interventions on paper. The description of variables may have differed in the 
respective studies, which may have led to some confusion in interpretation. It is pos -
sible that some analyses relevant for this review were carried out by the authors of the 
studies, but it was not possible to include these analyses in their published article. Per -
haps further contact with study authors would provide more
in their published article. Per -
haps further contact with study authors would provide more information. In any case, 
initiatives to standardize and improve the description of web-based interventions like 
the consort statement for eHealth (van Gemert-Pijnen et al., 2011) and guidelines for 
executing and reporting internet intervention research (Proudfoot et al., 2011) are still 
very necessary and will hopefully enable better comparisons of eHealth technologies. 
Another interrelated
and will hopefully enable better comparisons of eHealth technologies. 
Another interrelated limitation is the publication bias, which may have influenced the 
selection of studies for this review in the first place.
As this review does not include a meta-analysis, the overall effects such as study 
power or potential mediators have not been calculated. Therefore, the obtained results 
were compared more in the descriptive range. Rather than quantitative summarization 
of the data, this review is
more in the descriptive range. Rather than quantitative summarization 
of the data, this review is more of a qualitative synthesis of information. A statistical 
analysis of predictors and their relationship to adherence might reveal more underly -
ing relationships.
5.6	Implications	for 	future	research
While this review does not provide strong support for specific factors influencing the 
resulting adherence to eMBP, it presents a detailed overview of the state of measuring 
and reporting it,
adherence to eMBP, it presents a detailed overview of the state of measuring 
and reporting it, revealing a large opportunity for possible improvement. Consider -
ing the results of this study, it seems reasonable to first decide on a clear definition of 
adherence and what is considered adherent or non-adherent participation, and second 
to plan for adherence when designing eMBP. In order to do so, a clear definition and 
standardized measuring needs to be agreed on in this kind of intervention
a clear definition and 
standardized measuring needs to be agreed on in this kind of intervention with the 
aim of ensuring good methodology and preventing potential biases. To thoroughly 
understand the concept of adherence, qualitative analysis needs to be supplemented 
with qualitative data of reasons for adherence. 
Two hypothetical adherence predictors have not been studied yet, although we 
could expect their effect. The first one is the readiness to change derived from the
although we 
could expect their effect. The first one is the readiness to change derived from the 
transtheoretical model (e.g., Prochaska et al., 2020). We must expect that adherence 
to the intervention is highly dependent on the participant’s readiness to change their 
behaviour and attitudes. The different parts of the intervention for different stages of 
changes are the expected future of eHealth in the context of machine learning and 
“smart “alogoritms. 
The second one is the therapeutic
in the context of machine learning and 
“smart “alogoritms. 
The second one is the therapeutic alliance, such as the common factor in psycho -
therapy, which is supposed to be an essential factor in its outcomes (Mulder et al., 
2017). In the eHealth area, the therapeutic alliance is not a dyadic but a triadic rela -
tionship among the users, the e-mental health program, and the program supporter 247 	 Přehledové 	studie	 /(Cavanagh & Millings, 2013). Some data in the literature indicate that a
247 	 Přehledové 	studie	 /(Cavanagh & Millings, 2013). Some data in the literature indicate that a therapeutic 
alliance with the e-mental health program can be stated (Ormrod et al., 2010). Al -
though we do not yet know how much the therapeutic alliance matters in e-mental 
health program effectivity and research and discussion are still in their early stages 
(Cavanagh & Millings, 2013), this factor should be studied. The eHealth interven -
tions should also be designed to be able to
this factor should be studied. The eHealth interven -
tions should also be designed to be able to activate, develop and maintain the triadic 
therapeutic alliance. 
6 CONCLUSION
It seems that mindfulness programs have been adapted to eMBP in an ad-hoc manner 
and might benefit from considering possible influences on adherence specific to this 
kind of intervention. As this review showed rather inconclusive results about possible 
predictors of adherence, a finding only supported by mixed results
results about possible 
predictors of adherence, a finding only supported by mixed results from previous 
research, there is clearly a need for a more thorough investigation. As demographic 
and psychological variables have not yet been shown to provide sufficient explanation 
for non-adherence, the research might benefit from looking more into the intervention 
characteristics specific to the technology-based mode of delivery and the design of the 
programs itself. 
REFERENCES
Adherence (n.d.)
mode of delivery and the design of the 
programs itself. 
REFERENCES
Adherence (n.d.) In AP A Dictionary of Psychol -
ogy. Retrieved July 8, 2020 from https://dic -
tionary.apa.org/adherence
Ahtinen, A., Mattila, E., Välkkynen, P., Kaipain -
en, K., Vanhala, T., Ermes, M., Sairanen, E., 
Myllymäki, T., & Lappalainen, R. (2013). 
Mobile mental wellness training for stress 
management: feasibility and design implica -
tions based on a one-month field study. JMIR 
mHealth and uHealth , 1(2), e11.
and design implica -
tions based on a one-month field study. JMIR 
mHealth and uHealth , 1(2), e11. https://doi.
org/10.2196/mhealth.2596 
Allexandre, D., Bernstein, A. M., Hunter, J., 
Roizen, M. F., Morledge, T. J., & Walker, E. 
(2016). A web-based mindfulness stress man -
agement program in a corporate call center. 
Journal of Occupational and Environmen -
tal Medicine, 58 (3), 254-264. https://doi.
org/10.1097/JOM.0000000000000680
Andersson, G. (2018). Internet interventions: 
Past, present
G. (2018). Internet interventions: 
Past, present and future . Internet Interven -
tions, 12, 181-188 . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
invent.2018.03.008
Andersson, G., & Cuijpers, P. (2009). Inter -
net-based and other computerized psycho -
logical treatments for adult depression: A 
meta-analysis. Cognitive Behaviour Thera- 
py, 38 (4), 196-205. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
16506070903318960 
Andersson, G., & Titov, N. (2014). Advantages 
and limitations of Internet-based interventions 
for common
G., & Titov, N. (2014). Advantages 
and limitations of Internet-based interventions 
for common mental disorders. World Psy -
chiatry, 13 (1), 4-11. https://doi.org/10.1002/
wps.20083
Antonson, C., Thorsen, F., Sundquist, J., & 
Sundquist, K. (2018). Upper secondary school 
students’ compliance with two Internet-based 
self-help programmes: A randomised con -trolled trial. European Child, 27 (2), 191-200. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00787-017-1035-6
Asplund, R. P., Jäderlind, A., Björk, I. H.,
191-200. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00787-017-1035-6
Asplund, R. P., Jäderlind, A., Björk, I. H., Ljóts -
son, B., Carlbring, P., & Andersson, G. (2019). 
Experiences of internet-delivered and work-
focused cognitive behavioral therapy for 
stress: A qualitative study. Internet Interven -
tions , 18, 100282. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
invent.2019.100282
Baer, R. A. (2003). Mindfulness training as a 
clinical intervention: A conceptual and em -
pirical review. Clinical Psychology-Science 
and
as a 
clinical intervention: A conceptual and em -
pirical review. Clinical Psychology-Science 
and Practice, 10 (2), 125-143. https://doi.
org/10.1093/clipsy/bpg015
Bailey, N., Nguyen, J., Bialylew, E., Corin, S., 
Gilbertson, T., & Chambers, R. (2018). Effect 
on well-being from an online mindfulness in -
tervention: “Mindful in May”. Mindfulness , 
9(5), 1637. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12671-
018-0910-7
Beatty, L., & Binnion, C. (2016). A systematic 
review of predictors of, and reasons for,
L., & Binnion, C. (2016). A systematic 
review of predictors of, and reasons for, ad -
herence to online psychological interventions. 
International Journal of Behavioral Medi -
cine, 23 (6), 776-794. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12529-016-9556-9
Berrigan, D., Dodd, K., Troiano, R. P., Krebs-
Smith, S. M., & Barbash, R. B. (2003). Pat -
terns of health behavior in U.S. adults. Pre-
ventive Medicine, 36 (5), 615-623. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0091-7435(02)00067-1
Borjalilu, S., Mazaheri, M. A., &
36 (5), 615-623. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0091-7435(02)00067-1
Borjalilu, S., Mazaheri, M. A., & Talebpour, A. 
(2019). Effectiveness of mindfulness-based 
stress management in the mental health of 
Iranian University Students: A comparison 
of blended therapy, face-to-face sessions, and 248 / Přehledové 	studiemHealth app (Aramgar). Iranian Journal of 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences . In Press. 
https://doi.org/10.5812/ijpbs.84726. 
Bostock, S., Crosswell, A. D., Prather, A. A., &
. In Press. 
https://doi.org/10.5812/ijpbs.84726. 
Bostock, S., Crosswell, A. D., Prather, A. A., & 
Steptoe, A. (2018). Mindfulness on-the-go: 
Effects of a mindfulness meditation app on 
work stress and well-being. Journal of Oc -
cupational Health Psychology . https://doi.
org/10.1037/ocp0000118
Bruggeman Everts, F. Z., van der Lee, M. L., & 
de Jager Meezenbroek, E. (2015). Web-based 
individual mindfulness-based cognitive ther -
apy for cancer-related fatigue – A pilot study. 
Internet
mindfulness-based cognitive ther -
apy for cancer-related fatigue – A pilot study. 
Internet Interventions, 2 (2), 200-213. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.invent.2015.03.004
Buhrman, M., Gordh, T., & Andersson, G. 
(2016). Internet interventions for chronic 
pain including headache: A systematic re -
view. Internet Interventions, 4, 17-34. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.invent.2015.12.001 
Carlbring, P., Andersson, G., Cuijpers, P., Riper, 
H., & Hedman-Lagerlöf, E. (2018). Internet-
based vs.
P., Andersson, G., Cuijpers, P., Riper, 
H., & Hedman-Lagerlöf, E. (2018). Internet-
based vs. face-to-face cognitive behavior 
therapy for psychiatric and somatic disorders: 
An updated systematic review and meta-anal -
ysis. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 47 (1), 
1-18. https://doi.org/10.1080/16506073.2017
.1401115
Cavalera, C., Rovaris, M., Mendozzi, L., 
Pugnetti, L., Garegnani, M., Castelnuovo, 
G., Molinari, E. & Pagnini, F. (2018). Online 
meditation training for people with multi -
ple
G., Molinari, E. & Pagnini, F. (2018). Online 
meditation training for people with multi -
ple sclerosis: a randomized controlled trial. 
Multiple Sclerosis Journal , 25(4), 610-617. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1352458518761187.
Cavanagh, K., Churchard, A., O’Hanlon, P., 
Mundy, T., V otolato, P., Jones, F., Gu, J., & 
Strauss, C. (2018). A randomised controlled 
trial of a brief online mindfulness-based in -
tervention in a non-clinical population: Rep -
lication and extension. Mindfulness, 9
in -
tervention in a non-clinical population: Rep -
lication and extension. Mindfulness, 9 (4), 
1191-1205. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12671-
017-0856-1
Cavanagh, K., & Millings, A. (2013). (Inter)per -
sonal computing: The role of the therapeutic 
relationship in E-mental health. Journal of 
Contemporary Psychotherapy, 43 (4), 197-
206. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10879-013-
9242-z
Cavanagh, K., Strauss, C., Cicconi, F., Grif -
fiths, N., Wyper, A., & Jones, F. (2013). A 
randomised controlled trial
C., Cicconi, F., Grif -
fiths, N., Wyper, A., & Jones, F. (2013). A 
randomised controlled trial of a brief online 
mindfulness-based intervention. Behav -
iour Research and Therapy, 51 (9), 573-578. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2013.06.003
Chambless, D. L., & Hollon, S. D. (1998). De -
fining empirically supported therapies. Jour-
nal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
66(1), 7-18. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-
006X.66.1.7Cox, C. E., Jones, D. M., Reagan, W., Key, M. 
D., Hough, C. L.,
C. E., Jones, D. M., Reagan, W., Key, M. 
D., Hough, C. L., Ungar, A., Reagan, W., Key, 
M. D., Gremore, T., Olsen, M. K., Sanders, 
L., Greeson, J. M., & Porter, L. S. (2018). 
Effects of mindfulness training programmes 
delivered by a self-directed mobile app and 
by telephone compared with an education 
programme for survivors of critical illness: A 
pilot randomised clinical trial. Thorax. https://
doi.org/10.1136/thoraxjnl-2017-211264
Cramer, J. A., & Mattson, R. H. (1991). Moni -
toring
https://
doi.org/10.1136/thoraxjnl-2017-211264
Cramer, J. A., & Mattson, R. H. (1991). Moni -
toring compliance with antiepileptic drug 
therapy. In: J. A. Cramer, & B. Spilker (Eds.), 
Patient compliance in medical practice and 
clinical trials (pp. 123-138). Raven Press.
Dack, C., Ross, J., Stevenson, F., Pal, K., Gu -
bert, E., Michie, S., Yardley, L., Barnard, M., 
May, C., Farmer, A., Wood, B., & Murray, E. 
(2019). A digital self-management interven -
tion for adults with type 2 diabetes:
B., & Murray, E. 
(2019). A digital self-management interven -
tion for adults with type 2 diabetes: Combin -
ing theory, data and participatory design to 
develop HeLP-Diabetes. Internet Interven -
tions, 17, [100241]. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.invent.2019.100241 
Davis, M. J., & Addis, M. E. (1999). Predictors of 
attrition from behavioral medicine treatments. 
Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 21 (4), 339-
349. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02895967
Davis, M. C., & Zautra, A. J. (2013). An online
21 (4), 339-
349. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02895967
Davis, M. C., & Zautra, A. J. (2013). An online 
mindfulness intervention targeting socioemo -
tional regulation in fibromyalgia: Results of a 
randomized controlled trial. Annals of Behav -
ioral Medicine, 46 (3), 273-284. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12160-013-9513-7 
Didonna, F. (2009). Clinical handbook of mind -
fulness . Springer.
Dimidjian, S., Beck, A., Felder, J. N., Boggs, J. 
M., Gallop, R., & Segal, Z. V . (2014). Web-
based
S., Beck, A., Felder, J. N., Boggs, J. 
M., Gallop, R., & Segal, Z. V . (2014). Web-
based mindfulness-based cognitive therapy 
for reducing residual depressive symptoms: 
An open trial and quasi-experimental com -
parison to propensity score matched controls. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 63 , 83-89. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2014.09.004
Dimidjian, S., & Segal, Z. V . (2015). Prospects 
for a clinical science of mindfulness-based 
intervention. American Psychologist, 70 (7), 
593-620.
for a clinical science of mindfulness-based 
intervention. American Psychologist, 70 (7), 
593-620. https:// doi.org/ 10.1037/a0039589
Donker, T., Blankers, M., Hedman, E., Ljótsson, 
B., Petrie, K., & Christensen, H. (2015). Eco -
nomic evaluations of Internet interventions 
for mental health: A systematic review. Psy-
chological Medicine , 45(16), 3357-3376. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291715001427
Donkin, L., Christensen, H., Naismith, S. L., 
Neal, B., Hickie, I. B., & Glozier, N. (2011).
L., Christensen, H., Naismith, S. L., 
Neal, B., Hickie, I. B., & Glozier, N. (2011). A 
systematic review of the impact of adherence 
on the effectiveness of e-Therapies. Journal 
of Medical Internet Research , 13(3). https://
doi.org/10.2196/jmir.1772 249 	 Přehledové 	studie	 /Dowd, H., Hogan, M. J., McGuire, B. E., Davis, 
M. C., Sarma, K. M., Fish, R. A., & Zautra, 
A. J. (2015). Comparison of an online mind -
fulness-based cognitive therapy interven -
tion with online pain management
of an online mind -
fulness-based cognitive therapy interven -
tion with online pain management psychoe -
ducation: A randomized controlled study. The 
Clinical Journal of Pain , 31(6), 517-527. htt -
ps://doi.org/10.1097/AJP.0000000000000201
Eriksson, T., Germundsjö, L., Åström, E., & 
Rönnlund, M. (2018). Mindful self-com -
passion training reduces stress and burnout 
symptoms among practicing psychologists: 
A randomized controlled trial of a brief web-
based intervention. Frontiers in
psychologists: 
A randomized controlled trial of a brief web-
based intervention. Frontiers in Psychology , 
9. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02340 
Eysenbach, G. (2001). What is eHealth? Jour-
nal of Medical Internet Research, 3 (2), e20. 
https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.3.2.e20
Eysenbach, G. (2005). The law of attrition. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research, 7 (1), 
e11. https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.7.1.e11
Fish, J., Brimson, J., & Lynch, S. (2016). Mind -
fulness interventions delivered by
J., Brimson, J., & Lynch, S. (2016). Mind -
fulness interventions delivered by technol -
ogy without facilitator involvement: What 
research exists and what are the clinical out -
comes? Mindfulness, 7 (5), 1011-1023. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s12671-016-0548-2
Forbes, L., Gutierrez, D., & Johnson, S. K. 
(2018). Investigating adherence to an online 
introductory mindfulness program. Mindful -
ness, 9 (1), 271-282. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12671-017-0772-4
Fuller-Tyszkiewicz, M., Richardson, B.,
9 (1), 271-282. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12671-017-0772-4
Fuller-Tyszkiewicz, M., Richardson, B., Lewis, 
V ., Linardon, J., Mills, J., Juknaitis, K., Lew -
is, Ch., Coulson, K., O’Donnell, R., Arulka -
dacham, L., Ware, A., & Krug, I. (2019). A 
randomized trial exploring mindfulness and 
gratitude exercises as eHealth-based micro-
interventions for improving body satisfaction. 
Computers in Human Behavior, 95 , 58-65. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2019.01.028 
Galante, J., Bekkers, M.-J.,
Human Behavior, 95 , 58-65. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2019.01.028 
Galante, J., Bekkers, M.-J., Mitchell, C., & 
Gallacher, J. (2016). Loving-kindness medi -
tation effects on well-being and altruism: A 
mixed-methods online RCT. Applied Psy -
chology: Health, 8 (3), 322-350. https://doi.
org/10.1111/aphw.12074
Goldberg, S. B., Tucker, R. P., Greene, P. A., 
Davidson, R. J., Wampold, B. E., Kearney, 
D. J., & Simpson, T. L. (2018). Mindfulness-
based interventions for psychiatric disorders:
D. J., & Simpson, T. L. (2018). Mindfulness-
based interventions for psychiatric disorders: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Clini -
cal Psychology Review, 59 , 52-60. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cpr.2017.10.011 
Gu, J., Cavanagh, K., & Strauss, C. (2017). 
Investigating the specific effects of an on -
line mindfulness-based self-help interven -
tion on stress and underlying mechanisms. 
Mindfulness, 9 (4), 1245-1257. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12671-017-0867-y Halamova, J., Kanovsky, M.,
9 (4), 1245-1257. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12671-017-0867-y Halamova, J., Kanovsky, M., Jurková, V ., & 
Kupeli, N. (2018). Effect of a short-term on -
line version of a mindfulness-based interven -
tion on self-criticism and self-compassion 
in a nonclinical sample. Studia Psycholog -
ica, 60 , 259-273. https://doi.org/10.21909/
sp.2018.04.766. 
Hanley, A. W., Abell, N., Osborn, D. S., Roeh -
rig, A. D., & Canto, A. I. (2016). Mind the 
gaps: Are conclusions about mindfulness 
entirely
-
rig, A. D., & Canto, A. I. (2016). Mind the 
gaps: Are conclusions about mindfulness 
entirely conclusive? Journal of Counseling 
& Development, 94 (1), 103-113. https://doi.
org/10.1002/jcad.12066
Harerimana, B., Forchuk, C., & O’Regan, 
T. (2019). The use of technology for men -
tal healthcare delivery among older adults 
with depressive symptoms: A systematic 
literature review. International Journal of 
Mental Health Nursing . https://doi:10.1111/
inm.12571 
Hearn, J. H., Cotter, I., &
Journal of 
Mental Health Nursing . https://doi:10.1111/
inm.12571 
Hearn, J. H., Cotter, I., & Finlay, K. A. (2018). 
Efficacy of internet-delivered mindfulness for 
improving depression in caregivers of people 
with spinal cord injuries and chronic neuro -
pathic pain; A randomized controlled fea -
sibility trial. Archives of Physical Medicine 
and Rehabilitation . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apmr.2018.08.182 
Heckenberg, R. A., Hale, M. W., Kent, S., & 
Wright, B. J. (2018). An online
Heckenberg, R. A., Hale, M. W., Kent, S., & 
Wright, B. J. (2018). An online mindfulness-
based program is effective in improving affect, 
over-commitment, optimism and mucosal im -
munity. Physiology & Behavior . https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.physbeh.2018.11.001 
Hesser, H., Gustafsson, T., Lundén, C., Henrik -
son, O., Fattahi, K., Johnsson, E., Zetterqvist 
Westin, V ., Carlbring, P., Mäki-Torkko, E., 
Kaldo, V ., & Andersson, G. (2012). A rand -
omized controlled trial of internet-delivered
E., 
Kaldo, V ., & Andersson, G. (2012). A rand -
omized controlled trial of internet-delivered 
cognitive behavior therapy and acceptance 
and commitment therapy in the treatment of 
tinnitus. Journal of Consulting and Clini -
cal Psychology , 80(4), 649-661. https://doi.
org/10.1037/a0027021
Hoffmann, D., Rask, C. U., Hedman-Lagerlöf, 
E., Ljótsson, B., & Frostholm, L. (2018). 
Development and feasibility testing of inter -
net-delivered acceptance and commitment 
therapy for severe health
feasibility testing of inter -
net-delivered acceptance and commitment 
therapy for severe health anxiety: Pilot study. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research, 5 (2), 
e28. https://doi.org/10.2196/mental.9198
Howells, A., Ivtzan, I., & Eiroa-Orosa, F. (2016). 
Putting the ‘app’ in happiness: A randomised 
controlled trial of a smartphone-based mind -
fulness intervention to enhance wellbeing. 
Journal of Happiness Studies, 17 (1), 163-185. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10902-014-9589-1
Huberty, J.,
of Happiness Studies, 17 (1), 163-185. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10902-014-9589-1
Huberty, J., Green, J., Glissmann, C., Larkey, 
L., Puzia, M., & Lee, C. (2019). Efficacy 
of the mindfulness meditation mobile app 250 / Přehledové 	studie“calm” to reduce stress among college stu -
dents: Randomized controlled trial. JMIR 
mHealth and uHealth , 7(6), e14273. https://
doi.org/10.2196/14273
Hunter, J. E., Jenkins, C. L., Grim, V ., Leung, 
S., Charen, K. H., Hamilton, D. R., Allen, E. 
G. &
J. E., Jenkins, C. L., Grim, V ., Leung, 
S., Charen, K. H., Hamilton, D. R., Allen, E. 
G. & Sherman, S. L. (2019). Feasibility of an 
app-based mindfulness intervention among 
women with an FMR1 premutation experi -
encing maternal stress. Research in Devel -
opmental Disabilities, 89 , 76-82. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ridd.2019.03.008 
Champion, L., Economides, M., & Chandler, 
C. (2018). The efficacy of a brief app-based 
mindfulness intervention on psychosocial 
outcomes in healthy adults:
efficacy of a brief app-based 
mindfulness intervention on psychosocial 
outcomes in healthy adults: A pilot ran -
domised controlled trial. PLOS ONE, 13 (12), 
e0209482. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0209482 
Christensen H., Griffiths K. M., & Farrer L. 
(2009). Adherence in internet interventions 
for anxiety and depression. Journal of Medi -
cal Internet Research, 11 (2), e13. https://doi.
org/10.2196/jmir.1194
Jayewardene, W. P., Lohrmann, D. K., Erbe, 
R. G., & Torabi, M. R. (2017).
W. P., Lohrmann, D. K., Erbe, 
R. G., & Torabi, M. R. (2017). Effects of 
preventive online mindfulness interventions 
on stress and mindfulness: A meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Preventive 
Medicine Reports, 5 , 150-159. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.pmedr.2016.11.013
Järvelä-Reijonen, E., Karhunen, L., Sairanen, 
E., Muotka, J., Lindroos, S., Laitinen, J., 
Puttonen, S., Peuhkuri, K., Hallikainen, M., 
Pihlajamäki, J., Korpela, R., Ermes, M., Lap -
palainen, R., & Kolehmainen, M.
K., Hallikainen, M., 
Pihlajamäki, J., Korpela, R., Ermes, M., Lap -
palainen, R., & Kolehmainen, M. (2018). The 
effects of acceptance and commitment therapy 
on eating behavior and diet delivered through 
face-to-face contact and a mobile app: a rand -
omized controlled trial. International Journal 
of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 
15(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12966-018-
0654-8 
Joyce, S., Shand, F., Lal, T. J., Mott, B., Bry -
ant, R. A., & Harvey, S. B. (2019). Resil
Joyce, S., Shand, F., Lal, T. J., Mott, B., Bry -
ant, R. A., & Harvey, S. B. (2019). Resil -
ience@Work mindfulness program: Results 
from a cluster randomized controlled trial 
with first responders. Journal of Medical In -
ternet Research , 21(2), e12894. https://doi.
org/10.2196/12894
Kabat-Zinn, J. (1982). An outpatient program in 
behavioral medicine for chronic pain patients 
based on the practice of mindfulness medita -
tion: Theoretical considerations and prelimi -
nary results.
on the practice of mindfulness medita -
tion: Theoretical considerations and prelimi -
nary results. General Hospital Psychiatry, 
4(1), 33-47. https://doi.org/10.1016/0163-
8343(82)90026-3
Kelders, S. M., Bohlmeijer, E. T., & Van Ge -
mert-Pijnen, J. E. (2013). Participants, usage, 
and use patterns of a web-based intervention for the prevention of depression within a ran -
domized controlled trial. Journal of Medical 
Internet Research, 15 (8), e172. https://doi.
org/10.2196/jmir.2258
Kelders,
Journal of Medical 
Internet Research, 15 (8), e172. https://doi.
org/10.2196/jmir.2258
Kelders, S. M., Kok, R. N., Ossebaard, H. C., & 
Van Gemert-Pijnen, J. E. (2012). Persuasive 
system design does matter: a systematic re -
view of adherence to web-based interventions. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research, 14 (6), 
e152. https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.2104
Kelson, J. N., Lam, M. K., Keep, M., & Camp -
bell, A. J. (2017). Development and evalua -
tion of an online acceptance and commitment
& Camp -
bell, A. J. (2017). Development and evalua -
tion of an online acceptance and commitment 
therapy program for anxiety: Phase I iterative 
design. Journal of Technology in Human Ser -
vices, 35 (2), 135-151. https://doi.org/10.1080
/15228835.2017.1309311
Keng, S.-L., Smoski, M. J., & Robins, C. J. 
(2011). Effects of mindfulness on psychologi -
cal health: A review of empirical studies. Clin-
ical Psychology Review, 31 (6), 1041-1056. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2011.04.006
studies. Clin-
ical Psychology Review, 31 (6), 1041-1056. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2011.04.006 
Khazaeili, M., Zargham Hajebi, M., Mohama -
dkhani, P., & Mirzahoseini, H. (2019). The 
effectiveness of mindfulness-based interven -
tion on anxiety, depression and burden of car -
egivers of multiple sclerosis patients through 
web conferencing. Journal of Practice in 
Clinical Psychology, 7 (1), 21-32. https://doi.
org/10.32598/jpcp.7.1.21
Krieger, T., Martig, D. S., van den Brink, E., &
7 (1), 21-32. https://doi.
org/10.32598/jpcp.7.1.21
Krieger, T., Martig, D. S., van den Brink, E., & 
Berger, T. (2016). Working on self-compas -
sion online: A proof of concept and feasibility 
study. Internet Interventions, 6 , 64-70. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.invent.2016.10.001
Krusche, A., Dymond, M., Murphy, S. E., & 
Crane, C. (2018). Mindfulness for preg -
nancy: A randomised controlled study of 
online mindfulness during pregnancy. Mid -
wifery, 65 , 51-57.
A randomised controlled study of 
online mindfulness during pregnancy. Mid -
wifery, 65 , 51-57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
midw.2018.07.005 
Krusche, A., Williams, J. M. G., & Cyhlarova, 
E. (2013). Mindfulness online: An evaluation 
of the feasibility of a web-based mindfulness 
course for stress, anxiety and depression. Bmj 
Open, 3 (11). https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjo -
pen-2013-003498
Kubo, A., Kurtovich, E., McGinnis, M., Aghaee, 
S., Altschuler, A., Quesenberry, C., Kolevska 
T., & Avins,
Kurtovich, E., McGinnis, M., Aghaee, 
S., Altschuler, A., Quesenberry, C., Kolevska 
T., & Avins, A. L. (2019). A Randomized Con -
trolled Trial of mHealth mindfulness interven -
tion for cancer patients and informal cancer 
caregivers: A feasibility study within an inte -
grated health care delivery system. Integra -
tive Cancer Therapies, 18 , 26(5), 295-296. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1534735419850634 
Kvillemo, P., Brandberg, Y ., & Bränström, R. 
(2016). Feasibility and outcomes of an inter
Kvillemo, P., Brandberg, Y ., & Bränström, R. 
(2016). Feasibility and outcomes of an inter -
net-based mindfulness training program: A pi -
lot Randomized Controlled Trial. Jmir Men - 251 	 Přehledové 	studie	 /tal Health, 3 (3), e33. https://doi.org/10.2196/
mental.5457
Lappalainen, P., Langrial, S., Oinas-Kukkonen, 
H., Tolvanen, A., & Lappalainen, R. (2015). 
Web-based acceptance and commitment ther -
apy for depressive symptoms with minimal 
support: A randomized controlled trial.
commitment ther -
apy for depressive symptoms with minimal 
support: A randomized controlled trial. Be-
havior Modification, 39 (6), 805-834. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0145445515598142
Lappalainen, P., Langrial, S., Oinas-Kukkonen, 
H., Muotka, J., & Lappalainen, R. (2019). 
ACT for sleep - Internet-delivered self-help 
ACT for sub-clinical and clinical insomnia: A 
randomized controlled trial. Journal of Con -
textual Behavioral Science , 12, 119-127. htt-
ps://doi.org/
controlled trial. Journal of Con -
textual Behavioral Science , 12, 119-127. htt-
ps://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jcbs.2019.04.001
Lengacher, C. A., Reich, R. R., Ramesar, S., Ali -
nat, C. B., Moscoso, M., Cousin, L., Marino, 
V . R., Elias, M. N., Paterson, C. L., Pleasant, 
M. L., Rodriguez, C. S., Wang, H. L., Kip, K. 
E., Meng, H., & Park, J. Y . (2018). Feasibility 
of the mobile mindfulness-based stress reduc -
tion for breast cancer (mMBSR(BC)) program 
for symptom improvement among breast can
stress reduc -
tion for breast cancer (mMBSR(BC)) program 
for symptom improvement among breast can -
cer survivors. Psycho-Oncology, 27 (2), 524-
531. https://doi.org/10.1002/pon.4491
Levin, M. E., Haeger, J. A., Pierce, B. G., & 
Twohig, M. P. (2016). Web-based accept -
ance and commitment therapy for mental 
health problems in college students. Behav -
ior Modification, 41 (1), 141-162. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0145445516659645
Levin, M. E., Pistorello, J., Seeley, J. R., & 
Hayes, S. C.
M. E., Pistorello, J., Seeley, J. R., & 
Hayes, S. C. (2013). Feasibility of a prototype 
web-based acceptance and commitment ther -
apy prevention program for college students. 
Journal of American College Health, 62 (1), 
20-30. https://doi.org/10.1080/07448481.201
3.843533
Lilly, M., Calhoun, R., Painter, I., Beaton, R., 
Stangenes, S., Revere, D., Baseman, J., & 
Meischke, H. (2019). Destress 9-1-1– an 
online mindfulness-based intervention in 
reducing stress among emergency medical
9-1-1– an 
online mindfulness-based intervention in 
reducing stress among emergency medical 
dispatchers: a randomised controlled trial. 
Occupational and Environmental Medicine , 
76(10), 705-711. https://doi.org/10.1136/
oemed-2018-105598
Lyzwinski, L. N., Caffery, L., Bambling, M., 
Edirippulige, S., Stangenes, S., Revere, D., 
et al. (2019). The mindfulness app trial for 
weight, weight-related behaviors, and stress 
in university students: Randomized con -
trolled trial. Jmir Mhealth and
behaviors, and stress 
in university students: Randomized con -
trolled trial. Jmir Mhealth and Uhealth , 7(4), 
705-711. https://doi.org/10.2196/12210
Mak, W. W., Chio, F. H., Chan, A. T., Wu, E. 
K., & Lui, W. W. (2017). The efficacy of 
internet-based mindfulness training and 
cognitive-behavioral training with telephone 
support in the enhancement of mental health among college students and young working 
adults: Randomized controlled trial. Journal 
of Medical Internet Research, 19 (3).
young working 
adults: Randomized controlled trial. Journal 
of Medical Internet Research, 19 (3). https://
doi.org/10.2196/jmir.6737
Mani, M., Kavanagh, D. J., Hides, L., & Stoy -
anov, S. R. (2015). Review and evaluation 
of mindfulness-based iPhone apps. JMIR 
mHealth and uHealth , 3(3), e82. https://doi.
org/10.2196/mhealth.4328
Mattila, E., Lappalainen, R., Valkkynen, P., 
Sairanen, E., Lappalainen, P., Karhunen, L., 
Peuhkuri, K., Korpela, R., Kolehmainen, 
M., & Ermes, M. (2016). Usage
P., Karhunen, L., 
Peuhkuri, K., Korpela, R., Kolehmainen, 
M., & Ermes, M. (2016). Usage and dose re -
sponse of a mobile acceptance and commit -
ment therapy app: Secondary analysis of the 
intervention arm of a randomized controlled 
trial. Jmir Mhealth and Uhealth, 4 (3). https://
doi.org/10.2196/mhealth.5241
Messer, D., Horan, J. J., Larkey, L. K., & 
Shanholtz, C. E. (2019). Effects of internet 
training in mindfulness meditation on vari -
ables related to cancer recovery. Mindfulness.
training in mindfulness meditation on vari -
ables related to cancer recovery. Mindfulness. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12671-019-01182-y 
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., Altman, D. 
G., & The PRISMA Group (2009). Preferred 
reporting items for systematic reviews and 
meta-analyses: the PRISMA Statement. An-
nals of Internal Medicine, 151 (4), 264-269. 
https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-151-4-
200908180-00135
Montero-Marin, J., García-Campayo, J., Gaete, 
J., Araya, R., Demarzo, M.,
J., García-Campayo, J., Gaete, 
J., Araya, R., Demarzo, M., Manzanera, 
R., & Álvarez de Mon, M. (2018). Impact 
of a blended web-based mindfulness pro -
gramme for general practitioners: A pilot 
study. Mindfulness, 9 (1), 129-139. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12671-017-0752-8
Morisky, D. E., Green, L. W., Levine, D. M., 
Neal, B., Hickie, I. B., & Glozier, N. (1986). 
Concurrent and predictive validity of a self-
reported measure of medication adherence. 
Medical Care , 24(1), 67-74.
validity of a self-
reported measure of medication adherence. 
Medical Care , 24(1), 67-74. https://doi.
org/10.1097/00005650-198601000-00007
Morledge, T. J., Allexandre, D., Fox, E., Fu, A. 
Z., Higashi, M. K., Kruzikas, D. T., Pham, S. 
V ., & Reese, P. R. (2013). Feasibility of an 
online mindfulness program for stress man -
agement–A randomized, controlled trial. An-
nals of Behavioral Medicine, 46 (2), 137-148. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12160-013-9490-x
Mulder, R., Murray, G., & Rucklidge,
46 (2), 137-148. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12160-013-9490-x
Mulder, R., Murray, G., & Rucklidge, J. (2017). 
Common versus specific factors in psycho -
therapy: Opening the black box. The Lan -
cet Psychiatry, 4 (12), 953-962. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S2215-0366(17)30100-1
Murray, G., Leitan, N. D., Berk, M., Thomas, 
N., Michalak, E., Berk, L., Johnson, S. L., 
Jones, S., Perich, T., Allen, N. B., & Kyrios, 
M. (2015). Online mindfulness-based inter -
vention for late-stage bipolar disorder:
B., & Kyrios, 
M. (2015). Online mindfulness-based inter -
vention for late-stage bipolar disorder: Pilot 252 / Přehledové 	studieevidence for feasibility and effectiveness. 
Journal of Affective Disorders, 178 , 46-51. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2015.02.024
Naslund, J. A., Marsch, L. A., McHugo, G. J., 
& Bartels, S. J. (2015). Emerging mHealth 
and eHealth interventions for serious mental 
illness: a review of the literature. Journal of 
Mental Health, 24 (5), 321-332.
for serious mental 
illness: a review of the literature. Journal of 
Mental Health, 24 (5), 321-332. https://doi.or
g/10.3109/09638237.2015.1019054
Nguyen-Feng, V . N., Greer, C. S., & Frazier, P. 
(2017). Using online interventions to deliver 
college student mental health resources: Evi -
dence from randomized clinical trials. Psy-
chological Services, 14 (4), 481-489. https://
doi.org/10.1037/ser0000154
Nissen, E. R., O’Connor, M., Kaldo, V ., Højris, 
I., Borre, M., Zachariae, R., & Mehlsen,
E. R., O’Connor, M., Kaldo, V ., Højris, 
I., Borre, M., Zachariae, R., & Mehlsen, M. 
(2019). Internet‐delivered mindfulness‐based 
cognitive therapy for anxiety and depression 
in cancer survivors: A randomized controlled 
trial. Psycho-Oncology , 29(1), 68-75. https://
doi.org/10.1002/pon.5237
Onken, L. S., Carroll, K. M., Shoham, V ., Cuth -
bert, B. N., & Riddle, M. (2014). Reenvision -
ing clinical science: Unifying the discipline 
to improve the public health. Clinical Psy -
chological
clinical science: Unifying the discipline 
to improve the public health. Clinical Psy -
chological Science, 2 (1), 22-34. https://doi.
org/10.1177/2167702613497932
Ormrod, J. A., Kennedy, L., Scott, J., & Ca -
vanagh, K. (2010). Computerised cognitive 
behavioural therapy in an adult mental health 
service: A pilot study of outcomes and alliance. 
Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 39 (3), 188-192. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/16506071003675614
Pbert, L., Druker, S., Crawford, S., Frisard, 
Ch., Trivedi,
L., Druker, S., Crawford, S., Frisard, 
Ch., Trivedi, M. Osganian, S., & Brewer, J. 
(2019). Feasibility of a smartphone app with 
mindfulness training for adolescent smok -
ing cessation: Craving to Quit (C2Q)-Teen. 
Mindfulness, 11 . https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12671-019-01273-w. 
Petersen, J. M., Krafft, J., Twohig, M. P., & 
Levin, M. E. (2019). Evaluating the open 
and engaged components of acceptance and 
commitment therapy in an online self-guided 
website: Results from a pilot trial. Behav
and 
commitment therapy in an online self-guided 
website: Results from a pilot trial. Behav -
ior Modification , 29(1), 68-75. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0145445519878668
Potharst, E. S., Boekhorst, M., Cuijlits, I., 
van Broekhoven, K., Jacobs, A., Spek, V ., 
Nyklíček, I., Bögels, S. M., & Pop, V . (2019). 
A randomized control trial evaluating an on -
line mindful parenting training for mothers 
with elevated parental stress. Frontiers in Psy -
chology , 10, 1550. https://doi.org/10.3389/fp
with elevated parental stress. Frontiers in Psy -
chology , 10, 1550. https://doi.org/10.3389/fp -
syg.2019.01550
Prochaska, J. O., Norcross, J. C., & Saul, S. 
F. (2020). Generating psychotherapy break -
throughs: Transtheoretical strategies from 
population health psychology. American Psychologist, 75 (7), 996-1010. https://doi.
org/10.1037/amp0000568
Proudfoot, J., Klein, B., Barak, A., Carlbring, P., 
Cuijpers, P., Lange, A., Ritterband, L., & An -
dersson, G. (2011). Establishing
A., Carlbring, P., 
Cuijpers, P., Lange, A., Ritterband, L., & An -
dersson, G. (2011). Establishing guidelines 
for executing and reporting internet interven -
tion research. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 
40(2), 82-97. https://doi.org/10.1080/165060
73.2011.573807
Puolakanaho, A., Lappalainen, R., Lappalainen, 
P., Muotka, J. S., Hirvonen, R., Eklund, K. M., 
Ahonen, T. P. S., & Kiuru, N. (2018). Reduc -
ing stress and enhancing academic buoyancy 
among adolescents using a brief web-based
Reduc -
ing stress and enhancing academic buoyancy 
among adolescents using a brief web-based 
program based on acceptance and commit -
ment therapy: A randomized controlled trial. 
Journal of Youth and Adolescence. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10964-018-0973-8 
Rahimi-Ardabili, H., Reynolds, R., Vartanian, 
L. R., McLeod, L. V . D., & Zwar, N. (2017). 
A systematic review of the efficacy of inter -
ventions that aim to increase self-compassion 
on nutrition habits, eating behaviours, body 
weight
that aim to increase self-compassion 
on nutrition habits, eating behaviours, body 
weight and body image. Mindfulness, 9(2), 
388-400. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12671-
017-0804-0 
Richards, D., Richardson, T., Timulak, L., & 
McElvaney, J. (2015). The efficacy of online 
delivered treatment for generalized anxiety 
disorder: A systematic review and meta-anal -
ysis. Internet Interventions , 2(3), 272-282. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.invent.2015.07.003
Russell, L., Ugalde, A., Milne, D., Austin,
272-282. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.invent.2015.07.003
Russell, L., Ugalde, A., Milne, D., Austin, D., & 
Livingston, P. M. (2018). Digital characteris -
tics and dissemination indicators to optimize 
delivery of internet-supported mindfulness-
based interventions for people with a chronic 
condition: Systematic review. Jmir Mental 
Health, 5 (3). https://doi.org/10.2196/men -
tal.9645
Querstret, D., Cropley, M., & Fife-Schaw, C. 
(2017). Internet-based instructor-led mind -
fulness for
D., Cropley, M., & Fife-Schaw, C. 
(2017). Internet-based instructor-led mind -
fulness for work-related rumination, fatigue, 
and sleep: Assessing facets of mindfulness as 
mechanisms of change. A randomized waitlist 
control trial. Journal of Occupational Health 
Psychology, 22 (2), 153-169. https://doi.
org/10.1037/ocp0000028
Querstret, D., Cropley, M., & Fife-Schaw, C. 
(2018). The effects of an online mindfulness 
intervention on perceived stress, depression 
and anxiety in a non-clinical
an online mindfulness 
intervention on perceived stress, depression 
and anxiety in a non-clinical sample: A ran -
domised waitlist control trial. Mindfulness, 
9(6), 1825-1836. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12671-018-0925-0
Sairanen, E., Lappalainen, R., Lappalainen, P., 
Kaipainen, K., Carlstedt, F., Anclair, M., & 
Hiltunen, A. (2019). Effectiveness of a web-
based acceptance and commitment therapy 
intervention for wellbeing of parents whose 253 	 Přehledové 	studie	 /children have chronic
intervention for wellbeing of parents whose 253 	 Přehledové 	studie	 /children have chronic conditions: A rand -
omized controlled trial. Journal of Contextual 
Behavioral Science, 13 , 94-102. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jcbs.2019.07.004 
Scott, W., Chilcot, J., Guildford, B., Daly-Eichen -
hardt, A., & McCracken, L. M. (2018). Feasi -
bility randomized-controlled trial of online ac -
ceptance and commitment therapy for patients 
with complex chronic pain in the United King -
dom. European
and commitment therapy for patients 
with complex chronic pain in the United King -
dom. European Journal of Pain, 22 (8), 1473-
1484. https://doi.org/10.1002/ejp.1236
Segal, Z. V ., Williams, J. M. G., & Teasdale, J. 
D. (2002). Mindfulness-based cognitive ther -
apy for depression: A new approach to pre -
venting relapse. Guilford Press.
Shore, R., Strauss, C., Cavanagh, K., Hay -
ward, M., & Ellett, L. (2018). A randomised 
controlled trial of a brief online mindful -
ness-based intervention
L. (2018). A randomised 
controlled trial of a brief online mindful -
ness-based intervention on paranoia in a 
non-clinical sample: Results from a pilot 
trial. Mindfulness , 9(1), 294-302. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12671-017-0774-2
Simister, H. D., Tkachuk, G. A., Shay, B. L., 
Vincent, N., Pear, J. J., & Skrabek, R. Q. 
(2018). Randomized controlled trial of online 
acceptance and commitment therapy for fibro -
myalgia. The Journal of Pain, 19 (7), 741-753.
online 
acceptance and commitment therapy for fibro -
myalgia. The Journal of Pain, 19 (7), 741-753. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpain.2018.02.004 
Spijkerman, M. P. J., Pots, W. T. M., & Bohlmei -
jer, E. T. (2016). Effectiveness of online 
mindfulness-based interventions in improv -
ing mental health: A review and meta-anal -
ysis of randomised controlled trials. Clinical 
Psychology Review, 45 , 102-114. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cpr.2016.03.009
Stjernswärd, S., & Hansson, L. (2017). Effec
, 102-114. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cpr.2016.03.009
Stjernswärd, S., & Hansson, L. (2017). Effec -
tiveness and usability of a web-based mind -
fulness intervention for families living with 
mental illness. Mindfulness, 8 (3), 751-764. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12671-016-0653-2
Stjernswärd, S., & Hansson, L. (2018). Ef -
fectiveness and usability of a web-based 
mindfulness intervention for caregivers of 
people with mental or somatic illness. A ran -
domized controlled trial. Internet
for caregivers of 
people with mental or somatic illness. A ran -
domized controlled trial. Internet Interven -
tions, 12 , 46-56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
invent.2018.03.004
Thompson, N. J., Patel, A. H., Selwa, L. M., 
Stoll, S. C., Begley, C. E., Johnson, E. K., & 
Fraser, R. T. (2015). Expanding the efficacy of 
Project UPLIFT: Distance delivery of mind -
fulness-based depression prevention to peo -
ple with epilepsy. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 83 (2), 304-313.
to peo -
ple with epilepsy. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 83 (2), 304-313. https://
doi.org/10.1037/a0038404
Tomlinson, E. R., Yousaf, O., Vittersø, A. D., 
& Jones, L. (2018). Dispositional mindful -
ness and psychological health: A systematic 
review. Mindfulness , 9(1), 23-43. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12671-017-0762-6Toole, A. M., & Craighead, L. W. (2016). Brief 
self-compassion meditation training for body 
image distress in young adult women. Body 
Image, 19, 104-112.
meditation training for body 
image distress in young adult women. Body 
Image, 19, 104-112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bodyim.2016.09.001
Trompetter, H. R., Bohlmeijer, E. T., Veehof, M. 
M., & Schreurs, K. M. G. (2014). Internet-
based guided self-help intervention for chron -
ic pain based on acceptance and commitment 
therapy: A randomized controlled trial. Jour -
nal of Behavioral Medicine, 38 (1), 66-80. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10865-014-9579-0
Van Dam, N. T., van Vugt, M. K., Vago, D.
38 (1), 66-80. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10865-014-9579-0
Van Dam, N. T., van Vugt, M. K., Vago, D. R., 
Schmalzl, L., Saron, C. D., Olendzki, A., 
Meissner, T., Lazar, S. W., Kerr, C. E., Gor -
chov, J., Fox, K. C. R., Field, B. A., Britton, 
W. B., Brefczynski-Lewis, J. A., & Meyer, D. 
E. (2018). Mind the hype: A critical evalua -
tion and prescriptive agenda for research on 
mindfulness and meditation. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 13 (1), 36-61.
for research on 
mindfulness and meditation. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 13 (1), 36-61. https://
doi.org/10.1177/1745691617709589
Van Gemert-Pijnen, J. E. W. C., Nijland, N., van 
Limburg, M., Ossebaard, H. C., Kelders, S. 
M., Eysenbach, G., & Seydel, E. R. (2011). 
A holistic framework to improve the uptake 
and impact of eHealth technologies. Journal 
of Medical Internet Research, 13 (4). https://
doi.org/10.2196/jmir.1672
V ogel, E. A., Belohlavek, A., Prochaska, J. J., 
& Ramo,
13 (4). https://
doi.org/10.2196/jmir.1672
V ogel, E. A., Belohlavek, A., Prochaska, J. J., 
& Ramo, D. E. (2019). Development and ac -
ceptability testing of a Facebook smoking 
cessation intervention for sexual and gender 
minority young adults. Internet Interven -
tions, 15, 87-92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.in -
vent.2019.01.002 
Wahbeh, H., & Oken, B. S. (2016). Internet 
mindfulness meditation intervention for the 
general public: Pilot randomized controlled 
trial. Jmir Mental Health, 3
intervention for the 
general public: Pilot randomized controlled 
trial. Jmir Mental Health, 3 (3), e37. https://
doi.org/10.2196/mental.5900
Wahbeh, H., Svalina, M. N., & Oken, B. S. 
(2014). Group, One-on-One, or internet? 
Preferences for mindfulness meditation de -
livery format and their predictors. Open 
Medicine Journal, 1 , 66-74. https://doi.org/ 
10.2174/1874220301401010066.
Wahbeh, H., Goodrich, E., & Oken, B. S. 
(2016). Internet-based mindfulness medita -
tion for cognition and
H., Goodrich, E., & Oken, B. S. 
(2016). Internet-based mindfulness medita -
tion for cognition and mood in older adults: 
A pilot study. Alternative Therapies in Health 
and Medicine, 22 (2), 44-53. https://doi.org/ 
10.2174/1874220301401010066.
Waller, R., & Gilbody, S. (2008). Barriers to 
the uptake of computerized cognitive behav -
ioural therapy: a systematic review of the 
quantitative and qualitative evidence. Psy-
chological Medicine, 39 (05), 705.
review of the 
quantitative and qualitative evidence. Psy-
chological Medicine, 39 (05), 705. https://doi.
org/10.1017/s0033291708004224
Wangberg, S. C., Bergmo, T. S., & Johnsen, J. 254 / Přehledové 	studieA. (2008). Adherence in internet-based inter -
ventions. Patient Preference and Adherence, 
2, 57-65.
Webb, T. L., Joseph, J., Yardley, L., & Michie, 
S. (2010). Using the internet to promote 
health behavior change: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis of the impact of theoreti -
cal
health behavior change: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis of the impact of theoreti -
cal basis, use of behavior change techniques, 
and mode of delivery on efficacy. Journal of 
Medical Internet Research, 12 (1). https://doi.
org/10.2196/jmir.1376
Werner-Seidler, A., Johnston, L., & Chris -
tensen, H. (2018). Digitally-delivered 
cognitive-behavioural therapy for youth in -
somnia: A systematic review. Internet inter -
ventions , 11, 71-78.
therapy for youth in -
somnia: A systematic review. Internet inter -
ventions , 11, 71-78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
invent.2018.01.007
White, M. (2001). Receiving social support on -
line: implications for health education. Health 
Education Research, 16 (6), 693-707. https://
doi.org/10.1093/her/16.6.693
World Health Organization (2003). Adherence 
to long-term therapies: evidence for action 
/ [edited by Eduardo Sabaté]. World Health 
Organization. https://www.who.int/iris/han
for action 
/ [edited by Eduardo Sabaté]. World Health 
Organization. https://www.who.int/iris/han -
dle/10665/42682 
Younge, J. O., Michels, M., Roos-Hesselink, 
J. W., Wery, M. F., Gotink, R. A., Hunink, 
M. G. M., & Roos-Hesselink, J. W. (2015). 
Web-based mindfulness intervention in heart 
disease: A randomized controlled trial. Plos 
One, 10 (12). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0143843
Zernicke, K. A., Campbell, T. S., Speca, M., 
Carlson, L. E., Mccabe-Ruff, K., & Flow -
ers, S.
K. A., Campbell, T. S., Speca, M., 
Carlson, L. E., Mccabe-Ruff, K., & Flow -
ers, S. (2014). A randomized wait-list con -
trolled trial of feasibility and efficacy of an 
online mindfulness-based cancer recovery 
program: The eTherapy for cancer applying 
mindfulness trial. Psychosomatic Medicine, 
76(4), 257-267. https://doi.org/10.1097/
PSY .0000000000000053
APPENDIX 1
Appendix A – Example of electronic search 
strategy
Search strategy: PsychINFO (EBSCO)
#1 mindful* OR “mental health” OR
of electronic search 
strategy
Search strategy: PsychINFO (EBSCO)
#1 mindful* OR “mental health” OR accept -
ance* OR meditation* OR awareness* OR 
“MBSR” OR “MBCT” OR “Dialectical Behav -
ior Therapy” 
#2 online* OR web* OR internet* OR comput -
er* OR app* OR mobile* OR smartphone* OR technology* OR “e-learning” OR “e-health” OR 
ehealth OR “e-mental”
#3 adherence OR attrition OR compliance OR 
drop-out OR follow-up OR longevity OR par -
ticipation OR engagement OR effectiveness
#4 rct OR
OR 
drop-out OR follow-up OR longevity OR par -
ticipation OR engagement OR effectiveness
#4 rct OR random*
#5 English, Journal
SOUHRN
Přihlásit se do programu ještě není 
Mindfulness praxe: systematická 
review zkoumající adherenci 
k eHealth a mHealth programům 
založeným na Mindfulness v době 
před začátkem SARS-CoV-2 pandemie
Informační a komunikační technologie předsta -
vují nové a slibné kanály, jak lze k uživatelům 
doručit intervence založené na Mindfulness pří -
stupu. Běžným problémem
jak lze k uživatelům 
doručit intervence založené na Mindfulness pří -
stupu. Běžným problémem v této oblasti apliko -
vaného výzkumu je nedostatek evidence o adhe -
renci ke zmíněným programům. Aktuální článek 
ve formě systematické review podle PRISMA 
protokolu shrnuje informace o tom, jaká je ad -
herence k intervencím ve studiích zabývajících 
se eHealth Mindfulness programy, jak je adhe -
rence měřena a co jsou její možné prediktory. V 
databázích PubMed, Web of Science, Medline, 
Scopus a
měřena a co jsou její možné prediktory. V 
databázích PubMed, Web of Science, Medline, 
Scopus a PsychINFO bylo do konce roku 2019 
identifikováno 3104 potenciálně relevantních 
článků. Vzhledem k očekávanému nárůstu im -
plementace eHealth programů na podporu du -
ševního zdraví pro zdravou i klinickou populaci 
v důsledku pandemie SARS-CoV-2, se stávající 
review zabývala jen studiemi před začátkem 
pandemie. 69 z nich splnilo všechna vstupní kri -
téria pro systematickou review. 61 % studií
pandemie. 69 z nich splnilo všechna vstupní kri -
téria pro systematickou review. 61 % studií ve 
svých výsledcích prezentovalo různé parametry 
adherence, 36 % pak prezentovalo základní tzv. 
adherence rate. Míra adherence v klinických 
populacích se pohybovala od 41 % do 92 %; v 
neklinických populacích se pohybovala od 1 % 
do 85 %. Prediktory adherence byly zkoumány 
ve 48 % studií, většina hodnocených proměn -
ných však přinesla značně heterogenní výsled -
ky. Velká heterogenita byla
hodnocených proměn -
ných však přinesla značně heterogenní výsled -
ky. Velká heterogenita byla pozorována také v 
samotné definici adherence a ve způsobech a 
nástrojích jejího měření. Aktuální systematická 
review jednoznačně dokládá potřebu standardi -
zovaného systému měření adherence a dalšího 
výzkumu v oblasti jejích prediktorů.
