Results
Study Selection
The searches identif ied 530 unique records. Of these 530
records, 82 (15.5%) were included in the full-te xt review and
22 (4.2%) were included in the qualitati ve synthesis (Figure 1).
We performed the first search on September 13, 2021, and reran
the search on November 30, 2021, before analysis (Multimedia
Appendix 8[35,47-51]).
Figur e 1. PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) flowchart for identif ication and selection of
Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) flowchart for identif ication and selection of studies.
J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e44220 | p. 5 https://www .jmir.org/2023/1/e44220
(page number not for citation purposes)Osborne et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX Study Characteristics
OverviewDetailed characteristics of the included studies are presented in
Table 1. An overvie w of these characteristics is provided in the
following sections.
J Med Internet Res
1. An overvie w of these characteristics is provided in the
following sections.
J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e44220 | p. 6 https://www .jmir.org/2023/1/e44220
(page number not for citation purposes)Osborne et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX Table 1. Overvie w of the included studies.
Data collection and anal-
ysis methodsbAdditional support Interv ention description Sample characteristics and re-
cruitmentAuthor , year of pub-
lication (countrya)
Questionnaired;
Sample characteristics and re-
cruitmentAuthor , year of pub-
lication (countrya)
Questionnaired; descrip-
tive or inferential statis-None. Commercially available MMAs:
Headspace (43.9%), Calm
(18.7%), Smiling Mind (9.1%),N=726; 552 (76%) female, 151
(20.8%) male, 23 (3.2%) other;
aged 18-30 (mean 21.61, SDBerg and Perich
[52], 2022 (Aus-
tralia)tics. Participants listed
other (21.7%), and unspecif ied
(6.5%)3.45) years; young adults with
different levels of depression
severity (no depression,
ied
(6.5%)3.45) years; young adults with
different levels of depression
severity (no depression, mild totheir reasons for and
against using MMAs in
optional “other” response
moderate, and severe to ex-categories following
checklist items.treme); 230 (31.7%) had used
MMAscbefore. Recruited via
University of Sydne y participant
pool, Mechanical Turk, social
media, and word of mouth.
Intervie ws; content analy-
sis. Participants gaveSupport person introduced
self within 48 hours, orient-Mindful
content analy-
sis. Participants gaveSupport person introduced
self within 48 hours, orient-Mindful Mood Balance (MBCTe):
8 × 60-90–minute weekly sessions;N=38; 27 (71%) female, 11
(29%) male; mean age 46.89 (SD
12.38) years; 1 (3%) Asian, 1Boggs et al [53],
2014 (United States)
feedback on website ed participants to the inter-prerecorded meditation audio and
(3%) African American or Black, components, program vention, welcomed partici-videos of an in-person MBCT
34 (89%) White, 2 (5%) other;
program vention, welcomed partici-videos of an in-person MBCT
34 (89%) White, 2 (5%) other; content and delivery, and
skills learned.pants to each session, guided
participants through the
content, answered questionsgroup, prewritten reflecti ve ques-
tions, downloadable content, home
practice, group “ask a question”individuals with a history of ≥1
major depressi ve episode but not
currently experiencing moderate (whole group and individual-function, support contact, and re-
mindersto moderately
moderate (whole group and individual-function, support contact, and re-
mindersto moderately severe levels of
depression. Recruited from med-ly), and provided personal
reminders via phone or
email. ical settings via letters, flyers,
and referrals.
Intervie ws; thematic
analysis. ParticipantsSupport person answered
questions (individually).AEON mindfulness app: daily
practice over 5 weeks; participants
wrote thoughts and worries in theN=15; 10 (67%) female, 5 (33%)
male; aged 22-29 (mean
participants
wrote thoughts and worries in theN=15; 10 (67%) female, 5 (33%)
male; aged 22-29 (mean 25.47,
SD 2.39) years; individuals withChittaro and Vianel-
lo [54], 2016 (Italy)
gave feedback on what
they thought and felt app and practiced decentering no or minimal experience with
while using AEON and
how to impro ve it.from thoughts by watching them
disappear like ripples in water;
support contactmeditation. Recruited via direct
contact.
Intervie ws; content analy-
sis. Participants
contactmeditation. Recruited via direct
contact.
Intervie ws; content analy-
sis. Participants gaveSupport person sent wel-
come message, providedMBCT (for patients with cancer):
8 weekly sessions and 1 full-dayN=31; 6 (19%) male; mean age
53.0 (SD 12.3) years; patientsCompen et al [55],
2017 (the Nether -
lands) feedback on how they
experienced the eMBCT ,personal written feedback
(asynchronous), and an-silent retreat; each session con-
tained introductory text, guidedwith cancer who
and an-silent retreat; each session con-
tained introductory text, guidedwith cancer who experienced at
least mild psychological distress;
what facilitated and im- swered questions (individu-
ally).audiotaped exercises, and diaries;
home practice; feedback; and sup-
port contact14 (45%) completed, 10 (32%)
did not complete, and 7 (23%)
did not start eMBCTf. Recruitedpeded their participation,
and how to impro ve the
interv ention.via web-based media, patient as-
sociations, and mental
how to impro ve the
interv ention.via web-based media, patient as-
sociations, and mental health
care centers.
Intervie ws; thematic
analysis. ParticipantsSupport person provided
initial orientation call andMindful Mood Balance (MBCT
for perinatal women): 8 weeks;Women (N=37); mean age 30.49
(SD 4.09) years; 1 (3%) Asian,Felder et al [56],
2017 (United States)
gave feedback on their provided optional weekly prerecorded videos of an in-person 2 (5%) African American, 32
satisf action with and ex-
weekly prerecorded videos of an in-person 2 (5%) African American, 32
satisf action with and ex- coaching calls (individually
or in groups).MBCT group, audio-guided
mindfulness practices, yoga DVD,
reflection questions, didactic de-(87%) White, 2 (5%) other; indi-
viduals who were currently
pregnant and had a history of ≥1perience of using the
program.
scriptions, home practice, and op-
tional coachingmajor depressi ve episode but did
not currently meet the criteria for
a major depressi ve
coachingmajor depressi ve episode but did
not currently meet the criteria for
a major depressi ve episode. Re-
cruited from the community via
web-based resources, flyers in
medical and retail settings, and
direct referral from obstetric care
providers.
J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e44220 | p. 7 https://www .jmir.org/2023/1/e44220
(page number not for citation purposes)Osborne et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX Data collection and anal-
ysis methodsbAdditional
AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX Data collection and anal-
ysis methodsbAdditional support Interv ention description Sample characteristics and re-
cruitmentAuthor , year of pub-
lication (countrya)
Questionnaire; descrip-
tive or inferential statis-
tics. Participants de-
scribed obstacles to prac-
tice in a single optional
open-ended question fol-
lowing checklist items.Participants were sent a re-
minder if 3 days passed
without a log-in.Mindfulness meditation program:
10 ×
were sent a re-
minder if 3 days passed
without a log-in.Mindfulness meditation program:
10 × 10-minute daily sessions (up
to 30 days), guided meditation au-
dios, and remindersN=169; 116 (68.6%) female, 53
(31.4%) male; aged 18-58 (mean
20.33, SD 4.44) years; 109
(64.5%) White, 26 (15.4%)
African American, 5 (3%) Lati-
no, 16 (9.5%) Asian, 13 (7.7%)
other; under graduate students in-
terested in learning meditation
and with no previous meditation
experience. Recruited via univer-
sity
in learning meditation
and with no previous meditation
experience. Recruited via univer-
sity participant pool.Forbes et al [16],
2018 (United States)
Intervie ws and question-
naire; thematic analysis.
Participants gave feed-
back on satisf action, per-
ceived benef it, and per-
ceived barriers to prac-
tice.Automated email reminders
with encouragement. Sup-
port person answered non-
clinical and technical ques-
tions (individually).A Mindful Way to Health y Sleep
(mindfulness-based therap y
and technical ques-
tions (individually).A Mindful Way to Health y Sleep
(mindfulness-based therap y for
insomnia): 6 weekly modules;
videos, text, reflecti ve exercises,
meditation recordings, and quiz;
reminders; and support contactN=14; 100% female; aged 20-59
(mean 27.60, SD 10.42) years;
individuals experiencing insom-
nia symptoms. Recruited via
university staff and student re-
search portal and flyers in the
community .Kennett et al [57],
2021 (Australia)
Questionnaire; thematic
analysis.
and flyers in the
community .Kennett et al [57],
2021 (Australia)
Questionnaire; thematic
analysis. Participants
gave feedback on how
they practiced, percei ved
effects, what they liked
and dislik ed about the
training, and anything
else about their experi-
ence.Support person moderated
the discussion board.MBSRg(for 9-1-1 telecommunica-
tors): 7 × 20-30–minute weekly
lessons; videos, text, and guided
audio meditation; home practice;
and discussion boardN=149; 126 (84.6%) female, 23
(15.4%)
guided
audio meditation; home practice;
and discussion boardN=149; 126 (84.6%) female, 23
(15.4%) male; age: 11 (7.4%)
aged <26 years, 50 (33.6%) aged
18-35 years, 51 (34.2%) aged 36-
45, 28 (18.8%) aged 46-55 years,
9 (6.0%) aged 56-64 years; 141
(94.6%) White, 8 (5.4%) non-
White; 9-1-1 telecommunicators;
71 (47.7%) completed the inter-
vention, and 32 (21.5%) did not
complete a single session. Re-
cruited from emer gency call
centers via staff announcements,
recruitment emails and flyers,
and
Re-
cruited from emer gency call
centers via staff announcements,
recruitment emails and flyers,
and word of mouth.Kerr et al [58], 2019
(United States)
Intervie ws; thematic
analysis. Participants
gave feedback on their
experience with and rec-
ommended changes to
the study and Headspace.Optional push notification
reminders. Support person
called participants to remind
them to engage if they did
not complete ≥3 sessions in
the previous week.Headspace: 10-20 min daily over
6 weeks; 30-day
did
not complete ≥3 sessions in
the previous week.Headspace: 10-20 min daily over
6 weeks; 30-day “Basics” course,
then choice of other situation-spe-
cific courses; audio and video; and
remindersWomen (N=20); aged 19-39
(mean 31.4) years; 2 (10%)
African American or Black, 3
(15%) Hispanic, and 13 (65%)
White, 1 (5%) Asian, 1 (5%)
Multiracial; pregnant women
with moderate to moderately se-
vere depressi ve symptoms with-
out a regular mindfulness or
meditation practice. Recruited
via obstetrics
ve symptoms with-
out a regular mindfulness or
meditation practice. Recruited
via obstetrics and gynecology
clinics.Kubo et al [34],
2021 (United States)
Questionnaire; thematic
analysis. Participants re-
sponded to a single item
asking what they liked
the least about the pro-
gram.Support person provided
tailored feedback and gave
personal reminders (via
email and phone).ACThwebsite: 6 sessions over 4
weeks; text, audio, and videos;
worksheets and assessments with
feedback; home practice; and
over 4
weeks; text, audio, and videos;
worksheets and assessments with
feedback; home practice; and re-
mindersN=79; 52 (65.8%) female; 70
(88.6%) White, 2 (3%) Asian, 2
(3%) Hispanic, 2 (3%) multira-
cial, 1 (1%) African American,
1 (1%) Native Hawaiian or other
Pacific Islander; mean age 20.51
(SD 2.73; mode 18) years; col-
lege students. Recruited via uni-
versity participant pool, in-class
talks, flyers on campus, and stu-
dent health centers.Levin et al [59],
2017 (United States)
Intervie
flyers on campus, and stu-
dent health centers.Levin et al [59],
2017 (United States)
Intervie ws; thematic
analysis. Participants
gave feedback on the
ways in which specif ic
aspects of the study and
interv ention could be im-
proved.Support person answered
questions (whole group) and
contrib uted to the discussion
forum.Mindful Awareness Training and
Education: 6 weeks; prerecorded
videos of a live training group,
guided audio meditation, discus-
sion forum, and home practiceN=13; 8 (61.5%)
a live training group,
guided audio meditation, discus-
sion forum, and home practiceN=13; 8 (61.5%) female; aged
16-26 (mean 22) years; Aus-
tralian young people. Recruited
via a youth mental health promo-
tion website.Monshat et al [35],
2012 (Australia)
J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e44220 | p. 8 https://www .jmir.org/2023/1/e44220
(page number not for citation purposes)Osborne et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX Data collection and anal-
ysis methodsbAdditional
AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX Data collection and anal-
ysis methodsbAdditional support Interv ention description Sample characteristics and re-
cruitmentAuthor , year of pub-
lication (countrya)
Intervie ws, focus groups,
and questionnaire;
grounded theory . Partici-
pants gave feedback on
their understanding and
experiences of mindful-
ness practice.Support person answered
questions (whole group) and
contrib uted to the discussion
forum,Mindful Awareness Training
answered
questions (whole group) and
contrib uted to the discussion
forum,Mindful Awareness Training and
Education: 6 × 90-minute weekly
sessions; prerecorded videos of a
live training group, guided audio
meditation, discussion forum, and
home practiceN=11; aged 16-24 years; health y
young people; 8 (72.7%) complet-
ed the program. Recruited via
posters at a local university ,
welfare officers in local high
schools, and a youth mental
health promotion website.Monshat et al [47],
2013
officers in local high
schools, and a youth mental
health promotion website.Monshat et al [47],
2013 (Australia)
Questionnaire; content
analysis. Participants
shared their experiences
during meditation or dif-
ficulties they faced in a
single optional item.Daily SMS text message re-
minder . Support person re-
sponded to questions, prob-
lems, and suggestions (indi-
vidually) and did not pro-
vide coaching or feedback.Mindfulness meditation program:
approximately 12.8 min daily over
3 weeks;
coaching or feedback.Mindfulness meditation program:
approximately 12.8 min daily over
3 weeks; guided audio meditation,
reminders, and support contactN=175; 140 (79.9%) female;
aged 18-67 (mean 30.08, SD
8.78) years; novice meditators.
Recruited via social netw orks.Osin and Turilina
[60], 2022 (Russia)
Questionnaire; descrip-
tive or inferential statis-
tics. Participants gave
feedback on acceptability
(eg, whether they wanted
more contact with the in-
structor or participants).Participants
whether they wanted
more contact with the in-
structor or participants).Participants recei ved 2
weekly reminders. Support
person answered questions
about content or participa-
tion via email or phone (indi-
vidually).Couples MBI vs individual MBI:
8 × 60-minute weekly prerecorded
videos of trained MBSR and
mindfulness-based relationship
enhancement teachers, guided
meditation audios of 10-30 min-
utes, reminders, and support con-
tactCouples MBIi: Women (n=36);
mean age 39.67 (SD 5.44)
min-
utes, reminders, and support con-
tactCouples MBIi: Women (n=36);
mean age 39.67 (SD 5.44) years;
32 (88.8%) European American
or White, 2 (5.6%) African
American or Black, 1 (2.7%)
Asian American, 1 (2.7%) Mul-
tiracial American. Individual
MBI: Women (n=41); mean age
38.78 (SD 5.08) years; 33
(80.5%) European American or
White, 2 (4.9%) African Ameri-
can or Black, 2 (4.9%) Asian
American, 1 (2.4%) Hispanic
American, 2 (4.9%) Multiracial
American. All women diagnosed
with breast cancer .
1 (2.4%) Hispanic
American, 2 (4.9%) Multiracial
American. All women diagnosed
with breast cancer . Recruited via
clinical trials, referrals, and
breast cancer registries and sup-
port groups.Price-Blackshear et
al [48], 2020 (United
States)
Intervie ws; grounded
theory . Participants gave
feedback on their experi-
ence in learning and de-
veloping mindfulness.Push notification reminders.
Support person provided
weekly check-in calls.ACT app: 4 weeks; daily audio-
guided meditations, weekly
person provided
weekly check-in calls.ACT app: 4 weeks; daily audio-
guided meditations, weekly videos,
reflection journals, weekly phone
check-in, and remindersN=23; 14 (60.9%) male, 9
(39.1%) female; aged 23-43
years (mean 31.2, SD 5.5); col-
lege student veterans with PTSDj
symptoms. Recruited via email
to university military and veteran
services.Reyes [61], 2022
(United States)
Intervie ws; thematic
analysis. Participants
gave feedback on per-
ceived benef its, facilita-
tors of and barriers
Participants
gave feedback on per-
ceived benef its, facilita-
tors of and barriers to
use, and ideas for im-
provement.Push notification reminders.
Support person provided
weekly check-in calls.ACT app: 4 weeks; daily audio-
guided meditations, weekly videos,
reflection journals, weekly phone
check-in, and remindersN=23; 14 (60.9%) male, 9
(39.1%) female; aged 23-43
years (mean 31.2, SD 5.5); col-
lege student veterans with PTSD
symptoms. Recruited via email
to university military and
5.5); col-
lege student veterans with PTSD
symptoms. Recruited via email
to university military and veteran
services.Reyes et al [62],
2020 (United States)
Questionnaire; content
analysis. Participants ex-
panded on checklist
items about usability in
optional free-te xt an-
swers.Participants received weekly
email reminders. Support
person provided technical
support.MBSR (for families living with
mental illness): 2 × 10 min-
utes/day , 6 days/week for 8 weeks
(10-week test period); audio,
video,
illness): 2 × 10 min-
utes/day , 6 days/week for 8 weeks
(10-week test period); audio,
video, text, time log, and a private
diary; reminders; and support
contactN=78; 70 (89.7%) women, 8
(10.3%) men; age: 5 (6.4%) aged
20-29 years, 4 (5.1%) aged 30-
39 years, 20 (25.6%) aged 40-49
years, 25 (32.1%) aged 50-59
years, 18 (23.1%) aged 60-69
years, and 6 (7.7%) aged ≥70
years; relati ve or signif icant other
of a person with a mental illness
and no previous experience of
mindfulness meditation.
icant other
of a person with a mental illness
and no previous experience of
mindfulness meditation. Recruit-
ed via advertisements in papers,
newsletters, on the web, social
media, and interested clinics and
organizations.Stjernsw ärd and
Hansson [63], 2017
(Sweden)
J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e44220 | p. 9 https://www .jmir.org/2023/1/e44220
(page number not for citation purposes)Osborne et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX Data collection and anal-
ysis
et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX Data collection and anal-
ysis methodsbAdditional support Interv ention description Sample characteristics and re-
cruitmentAuthor , year of pub-
lication (countrya)
Intervie ws and question-
naire; content analysis.
Participants gave feed-
back on their experiences
of using the program (eg,
its usability , motivators
of and barriers to use,
and ideas for impro ve-
ment).Participants received weekly
email reminders. Support
person
to use,
and ideas for impro ve-
ment).Participants received weekly
email reminders. Support
person provided technical
support.MBSR (for families living with
mental illness): 2 × 10 min-
utes/day , 6 days/week for 8 weeks
(10-week test period); audio,
video, text, time log, and a private
diary; reminders; and support
contactN=15; 14 (93.3%) women, 1
(6.7%) men; aged 26-69 (mean
51) years; relati ve or signif icant
other of a person with a mental
illness and no previous experi-
ence of mindfulness
or signif icant
other of a person with a mental
illness and no previous experi-
ence of mindfulness meditation.
Recruited via advertisements in
papers, newsletters, on the web,
and interested organizations.Stjernsw ärd and
Hansson [64], 2017
(Sweden)
Intervie ws; content analy-
sis. Participants gave
feedback on program
content; format; potential
effects; and motivators,
hindrances, and general
experience of use.Participants received weekly
email reminders. Support
person provided
and general
experience of use.Participants received weekly
email reminders. Support
person provided technical
support.MBSR (for families living with
mental illness): 2 × 10 min-
utes/day , 6 days/week for 8 weeks
(10-week test period); audio,
video, text, time log, and a private
diary; reminders; and support
contactN=10; 9 (90%) women, 1 (10%)
men; aged 25-73 (mean 57.6)
years; relati ve or signif icant other
of a person with a mental illness
and no previous experience of
mindfulness meditation.
icant other
of a person with a mental illness
and no previous experience of
mindfulness meditation. Recruit-
ed via advertisements in papers,
newsletters, on the web, social
media, and interested clinics or
organizations.Stjernsw ärd and
Hansson [65], 2020
(Sweden)
Questionnaire; descrip-
tive or inferential statis-
tics. Participants elaborat-
ed on ratings on the help-
fulness, challenges, and
effects of the program in
optional open-ended
textbox es.Reminders throughout the
day.Mindful
and
effects of the program in
optional open-ended
textbox es.Reminders throughout the
day.Mindful Messaging app: daily
lessons over 3 weeks; audio
recordings, check-in questions, and
remindersN=29; 27 (93.1%) female, 1
(3.4%) male, 1 (3.4%) transgen-
der male; mean age 25.59 (SD
3.61) years; 3 (10.3%) Asian or
Asian American, 3 (10.3%)
Multiracial, 23 (79.3%) White;
young adults who engage in po-
tentially risky smartphone-related
behaviors. Recruited via adver-
tisements through email,
in po-
tentially risky smartphone-related
behaviors. Recruited via adver-
tisements through email, social
media, and on the web news
magazine.Trub and Starks
[66], 2017 (United
States)
Focus groups and ques-
tionnaire; thematic analy-
sis. Participants gave
feedback on materials
and their experience (eg,
what they liked, dislik ed,
and would change).Support person posted to the
discussion board, answered
questions (individually), and
contacted participants follow-
ing inacti vity to check
answered
questions (individually), and
contacted participants follow-
ing inacti vity to check in.Project UPLIFTk(MBCT for peo-
ple with epilepsy): 8 × 1-hour ses-
sions; video lessons, audio medita-
tions, discussion board, check-ins,
and home practiceFocus group: n=9; 7 (77.8%) fe-
male; 2 (22.2%) Black, 7
(77.8%) White; mean age 33.56
(SD 10.69) years. Questionnaire:
n=53; 40 (83%) female; mean
age 35.08 (SD 10.74) years; 13
(27%) Black, 35 (73%) White.
All diagnosed with epilepsy
female; mean
age 35.08 (SD 10.74) years; 13
(27%) Black, 35 (73%) White.
All diagnosed with epilepsy and
experiencing current depressi ve
symptoms (but not severe depres-
sion). Recruited from a hospital-
based epilepsy clinic.Walker et al [67],
2010 (United States)
J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e44220 | p. 10 https://www .jmir.org/2023/1/e44220
(page number not for citation purposes)Osborne et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX Data collection and anal-
ysis
et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX Data collection and anal-
ysis methodsbAdditional support Interv ention description Sample characteristics and re-
cruitmentAuthor , year of pub-
lication (countrya)
Focus groups; thematic
analysis. Participants
gave feedback on effects,
difficulties in practicing,
and ideas for impro ve-
ment.Support person offered ad-
vice and assistance, re-
viewed individual progress,
assigned the next activity,
and sent reminders.Pain management
re-
viewed individual progress,
assigned the next activity,
and sent reminders.Pain management program (for
people with ankylosing spondyli-
tis): 5 weekly chapters, text and
videos, practice time log, and re-
minders; each participant was fol-
lowed up by a counseling psychol-
ogistN=30; 17 (56.7%) female,
43.3%) male; aged 33-68 (mean
49, SD 10.39) years; patients di-
agnosed with ankylosing
spondylitis. Recruited from 2 lo-
cal nonprof it organizations.Yu et al [68], 2021
(China)
aCountry of
Recruited from 2 lo-
cal nonprof it organizations.Yu et al [68], 2021
(China)
aCountry of institutional affiliation of the first author .
bData collection and analysis methods for data included in the qualitati ve evidence synthesis.
cMMA: mobile mindfulness app.
dSelf-completion questionnaire with open-response categories.
eMBCT : mindfulness-based cogniti ve therap y.
feMBCT : internet-based mindfulness-based cogniti ve therap y.
gMBSR: mindfulness-based stress reduction.
hACT: acceptance and
cogniti ve therap y.
gMBSR: mindfulness-based stress reduction.
hACT: acceptance and commitment therap y.
iMBI: mindfulness-based interv ention.
jPTSD: posttraumatic stress disorder .
kUPLIFT : Using Practice and Learning to Increase Favorable Thoughts.
Year and Country
The 22 studies were published between 2010 and 2022, with
most (n=17, 77%) published from 2017 onward. The studies
were primarily from the United States (11/22, 50%), Europe
(6/22, 27%), and Australia (4/22, 18%). Multimedia
from the United States (11/22, 50%), Europe
(6/22, 27%), and Australia (4/22, 18%). Multimedia Appendix
9contains details on the years and countries.
Participants
The target population included students (2/22, 9%); young adults
(4/22, 18%); individuals with no meditation experience (2/22,
9%); relati ves or signif icant others of a person with mental
illness (3/22, 14%); 9-1-1 telecommunicators (1/22, 5%); and
individuals with symptoms, a diagnosis, or a history of a
psychological disorder or
(1/22, 5%); and
individuals with symptoms, a diagnosis, or a history of a
psychological disorder or another health concern (10/22, 45%).
Some studies (6/22, 27%) had samples with a combination of
these characteristics. Overall, the samples were approximately
78% female and 79% White, and participants were aged between
16 and 69 years. Using data from 86% (19/22) of studies that
reported or from which we could calculate the mean sample
age, the weighted average was 26.4 (weighted SD 8.8)
from which we could calculate the mean sample
age, the weighted average was 26.4 (weighted SD 8.8) years.
Interv entions
The digital interv entions tested included mindfulness-based
stress reduction or mindfulness-based stress reduction tailored
to families living with mental illness (5/22, 23%); MBCT or
MBCT tailored to patients with cancer , the perinatal period, or
people with epilepsy (4/22, 18%); acceptance and commitment
therap y (3/22, 14%); commercially available mindfulness
programs
18%); acceptance and commitment
therap y (3/22, 14%); commercially available mindfulness
programs (2/22, 9%); and other mindfulness-based programs
(8/22, 36%). Additional support to facilitate interv ention
completion was included in all but one study (21/22, 95%). This
ranged from automated reminders and nonclinical (ie, purely
technical) assistance to orientation calls and coaching. At least
86% (19/22) of the studies included human (vs automated)
support, and at least 55% (12/22) of the
(19/22) of the studies included human (vs automated)
support, and at least 55% (12/22) of the studies included support
that went beyond purely technical or administrati ve assistance
(eg, clinical or psychologically active guidance).Outcomes
In the interv ention studies, the most commonly used outcome
and process measures were mindfulness; psychological
flexibility; and variables related to mental health, including
depression, anxiety , stress, and well-being.
Methods
Most studies used in-depth
health, including
depression, anxiety , stress, and well-being.
Methods
Most studies used in-depth intervie ws (12/22, 55%) or
self-completion questionnaires with open-response categories
(12/22, 55%) to collect data, whereas other studies (3/22, 14%)
used focus groups. The studies primarily used thematic analysis
(10/22, 45%) to analyze the data, but other methods included
content analysis (6/22, 27%), descripti ve or inferential statistics
(4/22, 18%), and grounded theory (2/22, 9%).
Critical
27%), descripti ve or inferential statistics
(4/22, 18%), and grounded theory (2/22, 9%).
Critical Appraisal
All studies were assessed as adequately reported (Multimedia
Appendix 10[16,34,35,47,48,52-68]), including qualitati ve
studies (8/22, 36%) and mixed methods studies or questionnaire
surveys when evaluated both as a whole and with respect to
qualitati ve data on user experience only (14/22, 64%). Overall,
each study reported on the study design and questions,
participant selection, data
64%). Overall,
each study reported on the study design and questions,
participant selection, data collection, and analysis. When we
evaluated mixed methods studies or questionnaire surveys
considering only data included in our qualitati ve evidence
synthesis, 32% (7/22) of the studies did not provide details of
the analysis method (eg, the authors reviewed open responses
for common themes without reference to or full description of
the method), and 5% (1/22) of the studies did not describe
reference to or full description of
the method), and 5% (1/22) of the studies did not describe data
collection sufficiently .
Qualitati ve Synthesis
We identif ied three themes: (1) responses to own practice , (2)
making mindfulness a habit , and (3) leaning on other s. Each
theme is outlined in the following sections using illustrati ve
quotes.
J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e44220 | p. 11 https://www .jmir.org/2023/1/e44220
(page number not for citation purposes)Osborne et al JOURN AL OF
https://www .jmir.org/2023/1/e44220
(page number not for citation purposes)Osborne et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX Responses to Own Practice
A predominant theme was that negative reactions to one’s own
application of mindfulness during digital MBIs are common
and can discourage continued efforts. Participants reported not
being able to practice at times, either because they could not
find time to practice or because they experienced distractions
that interrupted their
they could not
find time to practice or because they experienced distractions
that interrupted their practice. When participants experienced
difficulties in scheduling time to practice, they also expressed
feelings of guilt, resentment, and self-criticism, which depleted
their motivation and led them to view practice as another
stressful demand:
I am finding it is almost causing more stress trying
to find the time to get practice in and to do the weekly
lessons. [Participant [58]]
[I felt] a
find the time to get practice in and to do the weekly
lessons. [Participant [58]]
[I felt] a little critical of self, felt like I couldn’ t do it
all, and it was my fault somehow , and this is too much
to ask with your daily life, and resentful. [Participant
[53]]
Similarly , participants felt frustrated by disturbances originating
from their environment (eg, shared spaces and noise levels) and
internal experience (eg, negative emotions, life problems, and
daily plans):
With project deadlines in
experience (eg, negative emotions, life problems, and
daily plans):
With project deadlines in parallel it is hard to choose
a time for meditation, very angry at myself .
[Participant [60]]
At times, there were too many interruptions that I
would get frustr ated. [Participant [58]]
In addition to not being able to practice at times, participants’
preoccupation with “doing it right” also fueled negative
reactions to their practice, which reduced motivation and
expectations of benef it. There was a
to their practice, which reduced motivation and
expectations of benef it. There was a repeated idea that there is
a right way to practice, and this was often expressed in the form
of insecurity about practicing properly . Participants reported
not knowing what was expected of them or what should happen
during practice, feeling puzzled and confused by the effects
they experienced and questioning the accurac y of their training
(eg, when they fell asleep, whether brief practices “count” or
they
the accurac y of their training
(eg, when they fell asleep, whether brief practices “count” or
they had “permission” to do a briefer practice when short of
time, or whether they were in the correct position):
I always want to do things right, and I wasn’ t sure
about how I did the meditation exercises in the
beginning . Is this the way I am supposed to do this?
[Participant [55]]
When I listen, I have a feeling that I do not quite
under stand what should happen during the
meditation.
I listen, I have a feeling that I do not quite
under stand what should happen during the
meditation. [Participant [60]]
Not knowing exactly what was expected in terms of
program structur e and training dose (despite
information), and lack of adher ence towar ds the
recommended dose sometimes induced a sense of
insecurity as to whether one was doing the training
properly and actually benef iting from it or taking it
seriously enough. This could deplete motivation.
[Author] [Participant [65]]I’m
from it or taking it
seriously enough. This could deplete motivation.
[Author] [Participant [65]]I’m worried whether I am doing the practices
correctly.[Participant [56]]
It’s really good to have that permission, so to say. I
did do the 3-minute breathing space a few times, but
I guess I was thinking that wasn’ t really doing the
home work because it is so brief. It’s good to know
that “counts. ”[Participant [56]]
This led to the desire for feedback on whether participants had
performed training
[56]]
This led to the desire for feedback on whether participants had
performed training properly and an additional brief “overvie w”
tutorial to aid memory in instances of insecurity [65].
Making Mindfulness a Habit
Another prominent notion was that establishing a consistent
training routine is not only an essential part of digital MBIs but
also one that requires resolution, perse verance, and
self-discipline. Participants recognized that being successful in
creating a routine and integrating
Participants recognized that being successful in
creating a routine and integrating mindfulness into their lives
made regular practice easier and that regular practice was
important when learning a new skill such as mindfulness:
It was difficult in that you had to carve out the time
really consistently , but it was also really valuable . I
don’t think the program would be as effective if you
weren’t being asked to do it daily . What I under stand
is you’re trying to develop a habit. [Participant
being asked to do it daily . What I under stand
is you’re trying to develop a habit. [Participant [53]]
To mana ge the issue of dwindling enthusiasm, the
participants made two suggestions. First, it was
important to practise more to make it become a
natur al habit. [...] setting aside time each day for
lying down and practising the exercises befor e sleep
and even during the daytime whene ver possible , no
matter how short the exercise was, could help them
build up their perseverance.[Author
possible , no
matter how short the exercise was, could help them
build up their perseverance.[Author [68]]
However, seeing the value of making mindfulness a habit was
not enough to meet the responsibility . Participants reported
needing to persist and grapple with the effortful task of making
practice a scheduled activity, which involved frequent
adjustments to their plans, priorities, and commitments:
You just have to make time for it like you make time
for anything else you want to do. You
just have to make time for it like you make time
for anything else you want to do. You just have to
work for it if this is something that you want.
[Participant [62]]
It’s a question of discipline /.../ I think one should
pinpoint that it’s strenuous and that one has to be
ready to strug gle with it because one belie ves in it.
[Participant [64]]
As the participants began to accommodate the daily
use of the app into their already busy personal,
academic, and professional schedules,
the daily
use of the app into their already busy personal,
academic, and professional schedules, they
encounter ed the challeng es of establishing a new
habit. For the participants, this was not a
straightforwar d process, but rather involved several
adjustments in their schedules, priorities, obligations.
[Author [62]]
In addition to having self-discipline and an inner resolution,
identifying a designated space to practice or connecting practice
J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e44220 | p.
designated space to practice or connecting practice
J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e44220 | p. 12 https://www .jmir.org/2023/1/e44220
(page number not for citation purposes)Osborne et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX with an existing routine activity, such as brushing teeth or taking
medication, helped participants get into the habit:
I made it important to always do it like in the same
place in my apartment and like around the same time.
I just have a chair in my
it like in the same
place in my apartment and like around the same time.
I just have a chair in my living room, and I always
did it in that chair. So yeah, it was always the same
chair. The same with the lighting , it would be the
same lights which were turned on. Like every day,
the situation was pretty much always the same .
Howe ver, there are lots of distractions in my life, so
that’s why I am still basically kind of baking it
[meditation routine] into like a scheduled activity
why I am still basically kind of baking it
[meditation routine] into like a scheduled activity .
[Participant [61]]
To make home practice enga gement more likely three
intervie wees suggested asking participants to practice
at the same time every day perhaps “pegging it” to
a routine activity (e.g., after brushing their teeth in
the morning) [...] Another suggested drawing a
parallel with the ritual and regularity of “when you’re
on a medication” when describing the approach to
practice .[Author
and regularity of “when you’re
on a medication” when describing the approach to
practice .[Author [35]]
Participants also highlighted the need for personalization (ie,
the provision of content that is tailored to the needs and
preferences of individual users) to motivate individuals to embed
mindfulness into their lives. For example, some participants
preferred shorter practices as they were more attainable with
respect to remaining attenti ve (ie, minimizing interruptions and
loss of focus),
attainable with
respect to remaining attenti ve (ie, minimizing interruptions and
loss of focus), scheduling (ie, easier to make time for and
integrate into daily life), and avoiding adverse experiences (ie,
boredom, impatience, and discomfort from sitting still), whereas
others preferred longer sessions that allowed time for the mind
to slow down and for participants to concentrate better . Such
contradictory preferences extended to several aspects of the
interv ention (eg, the amount of
. Such
contradictory preferences extended to several aspects of the
interv ention (eg, the amount of narration during guided
meditations, format of content delivery, degree of variation in
subject matter , and frequenc y of reminders), and participants
appreciated when they were considered:
I liked that there was a variety of practices to try.
Different things work for different people and that
was taken into account. [Participant [58]]
Qualitative data revealed vast individual differences
in
taken into account. [Participant [58]]
Qualitative data revealed vast individual differences
in the preferences for meditation. Voice instructions
appear ed helpful to some and disturbing to other s;
the same meditation sessions were experienced as
being too short or too long; some participants enjoyed
the soft background sounds of natur e while other s
said they would have preferr ed some background
music; some individuals were frustr ated by the silent
pauses that other s appreciated and
some individuals were frustr ated by the silent
pauses that other s appreciated and enjoyed; some
were uncomfortable with the same themes and
practices found to be particularly helpful by other
participants. All of this [...] suggests that
“one-size-f its-all” online interventions might be less
enga ging and less effective than those tailor ed to
individual preferences. [Author [60]]Leaning on Others
A core idea expressed in various ways throughout the data set
was that those engaging with
on Others
A core idea expressed in various ways throughout the data set
was that those engaging with digital MBIs depend on someone
else—whether a therapist, researcher , signif icant other , or
another participant—for support and encouragement and that
this impro ved engagement. An aspect of this idea was that
recei ving any form of communication from the digital MBI (eg,
automated reminders; messages of encouragement; or
personalized feedback via email, SMS text message, or phone
call) was
messages of encouragement; or
personalized feedback via email, SMS text message, or phone
call) was helpful in reminding and motivating participants to
practice without feeling intrusi ve:
A consistent messa ge from all intervie wees was that
any form of feedbac k or communication from the
programme was likely to improve retention. In
addition to forms of feedbac k already mentioned,
email (even if automated and using a “no-r eply”
address), and text messa ge reminder s, were thought
to be
if automated and using a “no-r eply”
address), and text messa ge reminder s, were thought
to be likely to be helpful without being intrusive .
[Author [35]]
I enjoyed the reminder s that the app sends you—I
really found that helpful because otherwise , I would
not have remember ed to do it.[Participant [62]]
Similarly , having a program “support person” was considered
essential. Many valued the existence of an individual (eg,
instructor , coach, therapist, or member of the research team)
with
existence of an individual (eg,
instructor , coach, therapist, or member of the research team)
with whom they could discuss program concepts and from whom
they could recei ve technical or administrati ve support.
Participants felt that it was reassuring to know someone was
available if needed, whether via phone, email, or an “Ask a
Question” or “Help” function:
All participants saw the value of having a support
person available who was only a phone call or email
away . Some participants
of having a support
person available who was only a phone call or email
away . Some participants mentioned more frequent
interactions with the support person and even those
who did not use the support reported that it was an
important asset of the program.[Author [53]]
Many endor sed that it was “essential” to have a
coach and helpful to know that one was available if
needed. [Author [56]]
Another main expression of this theme was not feeling part of
a community , which led participants to feel
main expression of this theme was not feeling part of
a community , which led participants to feel alone or that they
lacked a connection or sense of belonging with other users. This
in turn motivated requests for a “community component” (eg,
web-based forums, message boards, or group [video or phone]
chats) so that participants could discuss their interv ention
experiences, clarify content, and share challenges with other
users. This was particularly desired by participants with a shared
lived
share challenges with other
users. This was particularly desired by participants with a shared
lived experience so that they could interact, connect, and identify
with others (eg, perinatal women, individuals with epilepsy , or
patients with cancer). Although most of the included studies
(16/22, 73%) were of interv entions that did not have a
community component, this component was also highly valued
by participants for whom it was present (6/22, 27%):
I think this would be a lot better if there
participants for whom it was present (6/22, 27%):
I think this would be a lot better if there was a
Web-based group...I felt alone out here. I would have
been enga ged more.[Participant [53]]
J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e44220 | p. 13 https://www .jmir.org/2023/1/e44220
(page number not for citation purposes)Osborne et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX All intervie wees agreed that an online forum, which
enabled discussion about their programme
experiences, was
wees agreed that an online forum, which
enabled discussion about their programme
experiences, was highly desir able and was likely to
boost retention signif icantly through: clarifying
aspects of the teaching; sharing and overcoming
difficulties with practice; and encour aging
participants to remain enga ged and complete home
practice sessions. [Author [35]]
The majority expressed [...] a desir e for a community
function component of the program that would allow
them to interact with other
e for a community
function component of the program that would allow
them to interact with other perinatal women who were
using MMB [Mindful Mood Balance program].
[Author [56]]
A final dimension captured the tendenc y of participants to
engage in creati ve ways to seek support from others when none
or not enough was provided by the program. Participants
reported sharing the program with signif icant others, such as
family members, friends, and spouses, to help encourage their
consistent and
icant others, such as
family members, friends, and spouses, to help encourage their
consistent and continued practice:
I’m talking to my husband about how he can help me
protect some time on the week ends to do the longer
practices. [Participant [56]]
My kids actually started to look forwar d to it, so they
would actually ask to do it. That helped me kind of
stay on track.[Participant [62]]
Some participants were open with their training ,
sharing their experiences with the patient and
participants were open with their training ,
sharing their experiences with the patient and family
member s and occasionally doing some of the exercises
together .[Author [65]]
By reaching out to others in their lives, participants were able
to orchestrate their own social environment to support their
engagement with the program. This self-made way of forging
a helpful foundation for practice not only highlights the impact
that someone else can have on people’ s engagement with digital
MBIs but
only highlights the impact
that someone else can have on people’ s engagement with digital
MBIs but also indicates that people are not reliant on a
mindfulness teacher to feel supported.
Discussion
Principal Findings
This review identif ied, critically appraised, and synthesized
qualitati ve data from 22 original studies of people’ s experiences
using a digital MBI to identify factors that facilitate or act as
barriers to their engagement with the interv ention. Three
overarching themes appeared
or act as
barriers to their engagement with the interv ention. Three
overarching themes appeared to influence engagement: (1)
responses to own practice , (2) making mindfulness a habit , and
(3) leaning on other s. Together , these themes provide crucial
insights as to why people frequently stop engaging with digital
MBIs. The following discussion elaborates on these areas and
offers some recommendations for researchers and developers
to guide interv ention design and evaluation, thereby impro
for researchers and developers
to guide interv ention design and evaluation, thereby impro ving
acceptability and engagement with digital MBIs, increasing
their effectiveness, and supporting their translation to real-w orld
use.
The first theme emphasized how adverse reactions to one’s own
practice are common and may serve to reduce motivation. This
suggests that the tendenc y to respond negatively to one’s ownexperience and application of mindfulness is a major barrier to
using digital MBIs,
to one’s ownexperience and application of mindfulness is a major barrier to
using digital MBIs, which is consistent with the wider literature
on mindfulness interv entions and offers initial support for
extending this finding to digital interv ention formats. For
example, in one study , the question “Am I doing it right?”
emer ged by the second week of a traditional MBCT course [69].
In another study , participants reported feeling self-critical when
they could not make time to practice and when
, participants reported feeling self-critical when
they could not make time to practice and when mindfulness did
not appear to work for them [18]. As in this review, this negative
reaction made it difficult for participants to continue to engage,
prompting them to give up and remo ve it from their to-do list.
To help overcome this barrier , traditional face-to-f ace programs
such as MBCT explicitly allocate time to anticipating what
difficulties and obstacles may arise in doing home practice
allocate time to anticipating what
difficulties and obstacles may arise in doing home practice (eg,
trying to find free time) and how to deal with them [7]. Such
content on overcoming barriers may be lost in the translation
to digital formats, and our review is the first to highlight the
importance of explicitly addressing this in digital MBIs.
This finding also indicates that one of the most important factors
influencing engagement with digital MBIs is unique to
mindfulness specif ically rather
factors
influencing engagement with digital MBIs is unique to
mindfulness specif ically rather than general to digital
interv entions and reflects the metacogniti ve nature of the
interv ention’ s target behavior. Our review offers clear guidance
on which particular combinations of factors identif ied across
other literature (eg, on digital interv entions or mindfulness
interv entions more broadly) are most influential in the specif ic
conte xt of digital MBIs, which is essential to make
broadly) are most influential in the specif ic
conte xt of digital MBIs, which is essential to make these
interv entions more persuasi ve, feasible, and relevant to users
[20].
The second theme (making mindfulness a habit ) highlighted the
need and effort required to practice consistently and a call for
personalization to help achie ve this. This suggests that forming
a mindfulness habit is a key barrier to sustained engagement
with digital MBIs and that persuasi ve technological features
could
barrier to sustained engagement
with digital MBIs and that persuasi ve technological features
could help overcome this barrier . Although prior work on digital
interv entions has identif ied personalization as an important
feature, this review is the first to demonstrate its relevance to
digital mindfulness interv entions specif ically . For example, a
systematic review of web-based interv entions found that the
inclusion of persuasi ve design principles, including tailoring
(ie, provision of
found that the
inclusion of persuasi ve design principles, including tailoring
(ie, provision of content or feedback adapted to factors relevant
to a user), explained 55% of the variance in session completion
across studies [70]. Our findings suggest that certain factors
that contrib ute to engagement with digital content in mobile
and web-based interv entions more generally may also apply to
interv entions for which engagement with the digital content is
designed to facilitate completion of a
entions for which engagement with the digital content is
designed to facilitate completion of a nondigital target behavior
(eg, an experiential mindfulness exercise) [11]. Notably , the
threshold of engagement with the digital component that
successfully facilitates the “non-digital target behaviour” can
demonstrably vary between individuals [71], supporting a shift
toward patient-treatment matching and person-centered care
[72] and underscoring the need to implement this digitally (eg,
through
and person-centered care
[72] and underscoring the need to implement this digitally (eg,
through automated personalization).
Conversely , this theme diverges from the results of a thematic
analysis of the experiences of health care professionals who
participated in either a web-based or printed self-help MBI [18].
The health care professionals consistently reported that longer
J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e44220 | p. 14 https://www .jmir.org/2023/1/e44220
(page number not for citation
2023 | vol. 25 | e44220 | p. 14 https://www .jmir.org/2023/1/e44220
(page number not for citation purposes)Osborne et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX practices were more challenging to engage with than shorter
practices, whereas our review found considerable variation in
preferences for different interv ention features (eg, format,
materials, and sound), including length of practice, perhaps
because of the breadth of MBIs included in our robust evidence
synthesis. This
of practice, perhaps
because of the breadth of MBIs included in our robust evidence
synthesis. This highlights the importance of understanding the
key behavioral and psychological needs of the target population
to ensure that the interv ention addresses them.
The third theme (leaning on other s) highlighted that those
engaging with digital MBIs are encouraged by additional support
in its broadest sense (ie, anycommunication designed to support
anyaspect of the interv ention, its completion, or
sense (ie, anycommunication designed to support
anyaspect of the interv ention, its completion, or its desired
outcomes). This includes synchronous (eg, phone calls and
web-based chats) and asynchronous (eg, email and SMS text
messages) communication, support provided to a group of
people (eg, discussion forums and group chats), and anything
else (eg, automated reminders, technical assistance, feedback,
and reaching out to someone). Although these results align with
those of previous research on
reaching out to someone). Although these results align with
those of previous research on the impact of additional support
in digital interv entions [73], this study cannot draw conclusions
on the relati ve power of each type of support because of the
variability across studies. Given this, the provision of support
in research settings needs to be considered. Interv entions from
almost all the studies in this review included additional support;
however, it was not always clear what this
the studies in this review included additional support;
however, it was not always clear what this constituted. For
example, some studies (2/22, 9%) reported that participants
could ask questions via email but did not specify whether they
recei ved clinical or purely technical assistance. Relatedly ,
participants may not have used the support on offer, although
the results from this review indicate that this is not as important
as having it available. Additional support in other studies
indicate that this is not as important
as having it available. Additional support in other studies (3/22,
14%) was provided to a group of participants; however, this
type of support has been excluded from definitions of guidance
[74]. Future research could explore whether there are unique
barriers to engagement in guided versus unguided digital MBIs
and compare different types and levels of support to advance
understanding of how, when, and for whom additional support
can impro ve engagement.
to advance
understanding of how, when, and for whom additional support
can impro ve engagement. This is important as there is a trade-of f
between the provision of support and scalability—if digital
MBIs need to have someone always available to be engaging,
they will be limited in reach and cost-ef fectiveness.
Irrespecti ve of these uncertainties regarding the relati ve
contrib utions of different types of support, it is worth noting
that social support was found to be a key facilitator
different types of support, it is worth noting
that social support was found to be a key facilitator of
engagement. This idea is consistent with the historical origins
of mindfulness (ie, to be practiced collecti vely and in community
[75]) and findings from in-person group settings. In a synthesis
of the accounts of individuals with mental health difficulties in
group MBIs [76], learning mindfulness within a group was
found to be helpful as peer support encouraged perse verance
with course
within a group was
found to be helpful as peer support encouraged perse verance
with course demands and learning alongside people with similar
experiences fostered a comfortable and destigmatizing
environment. Our findings point to the idea that digital MBIs
may suffer decreased engagement as a result of reduced social
support.Implications for Inter vention
Researchers can use the factors identif ied in this review to guide
interv ention design and, ultimately , impro ve engagement with
digital
ied in this review to guide
interv ention design and, ultimately , impro ve engagement with
digital MBIs. However, such strate gies must be (1) grounded
in relevant literature and (2) directly relevant to the individuals
who will use the interv entions. For example, the second theme
suggests that instructing people to practice regularly is unlik ely
to turn it into a habit. Researchers might consider drawing on
research on behavior change and habit formation, particularly
with regard to digital
drawing on
research on behavior change and habit formation, particularly
with regard to digital interv entions (eg, gamification technology
to motivate behavior change). Researchers might also consider
carrying out primary qualitati ve research to ensure that the
generated strate gies are informed by and meet the priorities and
needs of the intended user. The person-based approach offers
a systematic means of integrating theory , evidence, and user
perspecti ves into initial interv ention
systematic means of integrating theory , evidence, and user
perspecti ves into initial interv ention planning [19,20]. Therefore,
the themes highlighted in this review could inform the
production of guiding principles within this approach (ie,
interv ention design objecti ves and key features intended to
achie ve each aim).
Strengths and Limitations
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first review to
synthesize qualitati ve evidence from individual studies across
different conte xts to
review to
synthesize qualitati ve evidence from individual studies across
different conte xts to advance the understanding of the barriers
to and facilitators of engagement with digital MBIs. Using
inducti ve thematic synthesis encouraged the generation of
themes that “go beyond” the content of the primary studies to
produce novel findings. All 22 studies were assessed as being
adequately reported, which suggests that the papers included
in this review are of sufficient quality to draw
reported, which suggests that the papers included
in this review are of sufficient quality to draw concrete
inferences. We also followed established methodological
guidance; used an a priori published protocol; and took several
steps to increase the validity and reliability of the review,
including pilot-testing forms and procedures, consultation with
an information specialist, and regular team meetings.
In terms of limitations, we restricted our search to PsycINFO
to manage the number of
team meetings.
In terms of limitations, we restricted our search to PsycINFO
to manage the number of studies in a resource-ef ficient manner .
However, it is possible that this led to the omission of additional
relevant studies or introduced selection bias. Where possible
(eg, in reviews with longer time frames), researchers should
consider searching several sources and using purposi ve sampling
to ensure that the final set of included studies meets relevant
criteria (eg, has a wide geographic
ensure that the final set of included studies meets relevant
criteria (eg, has a wide geographic spread or rich data [42]).
The studies included in this review reported mostly on White
adult female individuals from Western countries, which means
that the generalizability of our findings to underrepresented
groups is unclear . This is an important area for further research
as initial engagement with digital and mobile health
interv entions is lower in some underserv ed populations (eg,
people of
digital and mobile health
interv entions is lower in some underserv ed populations (eg,
people of lower socioeconomic status [28]). Relatedly , we
excluded studies with samples entirely aged <16 years and/or
>35 years because of the focus of our own interv ention
development being on young people. Although the final age
range covered was 16 to 69 years, future research would benef it
from investigating engagement in younger and older populations
as motivations to use digital interv entions may
engagement in younger and older populations
as motivations to use digital interv entions may vary.
J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e44220 | p. 15 https://www .jmir.org/2023/1/e44220
(page number not for citation purposes)Osborne et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX There was signif icant heterogeneity across the interv entions
(eg, commercially available programs, acceptance and
commitment therap y, mindful messaging, and guided
mindfulness meditations) in the included
and
commitment therap y, mindful messaging, and guided
mindfulness meditations) in the included studies, and these
differences may have influenced engagement. Researchers and
developers of digital MBIs should also consider how specif ic
elements (eg, content, mode of delivery, and provision of
support) might make people more or less likely to stop using
the technology . Finally , although this review synthesized
evidence from diverse study types, it is worth bearing in mind
that engagement with
synthesized
evidence from diverse study types, it is worth bearing in mind
that engagement with MBIs is usually defined in terms of
interv ention use (ie, physical engagement [77]). It is unclear
whether the factors identif ied in this review characterize
facilitation and hindrance of aspects of psychological
engagement, such as intention to practice mindfulness, beliefthat practicing mindfulness will be helpful, and commitment to
integrating mindfulness into daily life. This is an important
will be helpful, and commitment to
integrating mindfulness into daily life. This is an important area
for further research given evidence that psychological rather
than physical diseng agement from self-help MBIs has a greater
impact on cultivating mindfulness [77].
Conclusions
Previous studies have shown the potential of digital MBIs to
impro ve a range of health outcomes. Sufficient engagement
with these interv entions is required to achie ve the intended
effects; however, engagement is
these interv entions is required to achie ve the intended
effects; however, engagement is typically poor. This review
synthesized evidence from studies on digital MBIs and identif ied
3 key factors that influence user engagement. We recommend
that researchers generate their own solutions to these challenges
by drawing on relevant literature and working with people from
the target user population.
Ackno wledgments
This work was supported by the Economic and Social Research Council South West
wledgments
This work was supported by the Economic and Social Research Council South West Doctoral Training Partnership (grant
ES/P000630/1). The authors would like to thank Justin Hodds, who assisted with developing the search strate gy; Masha Remskar ,
who assisted with piloting the screening process and data charting; Andre w Booth, who advised on assessing the quality of the
qualitati ve research; and Elisa Todor, who assisted with performing quality assessment and reporting study
ve research; and Elisa Todor, who assisted with performing quality assessment and reporting study characteristics.
Data Availability
Relevant data are available in this paper and its supplementary files. Requests for additional material should be addressed to the
corresponding author .
Authors' Contrib utions
ELO contrib uted to conceptualization, methodology , formal analysis, writing—original draft, writing—re view and editing, and
funding acquisition. BA contrib uted to methodology ,
draft, writing—re view and editing, and
funding acquisition. BA contrib uted to methodology , writing—re view and editing, and supervision. NH contrib uted to
writing—re view and editing—and supervision. MJA contrib uted to conceptualization, methodology , writing—re view and editing,
supervision, and funding acquisition.
Conflicts of Inter est
None declared.
Multimedia Appendix 1
PRISMA-ScR (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews)
(Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews) checklist.
[PDF File (Adobe PDF File), 101 KB-Multimedia Appendix 1]
Multimedia Appendix 2
Piloting screening.
[PDF File (Adobe PDF File), 81 KB-Multimedia Appendix 2]
Multimedia Appendix 3
Data charting form.
[PDF File (Adobe PDF File), 24 KB-Multimedia Appendix 3]
Multimedia Appendix 4
Piloting data charting.
[PDF File (Adobe PDF File), 71 KB-Multimedia Appendix 4]
Multimedia Appendix 5
Excerpt
charting.
[PDF File (Adobe PDF File), 71 KB-Multimedia Appendix 4]
Multimedia Appendix 5
Excerpt from data charting.
J Med Internet Res 2023 | vol. 25 | e44220 | p. 16 https://www .jmir.org/2023/1/e44220
(page number not for citation purposes)Osborne et al JOURN AL OF MEDICAL INTERNET RESEARCH
XSL•FO
RenderX [PDF File (Adobe PDF File), 196 KB-Multimedia Appendix 5]
Multimedia Appendix 6
Data analysis.
[PDF File (Adobe PDF File), 132 KB-Multimedia Appendix 6]
Multimedia Appendix 7
Methodological
File (Adobe PDF File), 132 KB-Multimedia Appendix 6]
Multimedia Appendix 7
Methodological streamlining.
[PDF File (Adobe PDF File), 74 KB-Multimedia Appendix 7]
Multimedia Appendix 8
Study selection.
[PDF File (Adobe PDF File), 73 KB-Multimedia Appendix 8]
Multimedia Appendix 9
Study characteristics.
[PDF File (Adobe PDF File), 14 KB-Multimedia Appendix 9]
Multimedia Appendix 10
Critical appraisal.
[PDF File (Adobe PDF File), 35 KB-Multimedia Appendix 10]
Refer ences
