iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 15 (2024) International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) 109
iJOE | eISSN: 2626-8493 | Vol. 20 No. 15 (2024) | JOEInternational Journal of 
Online and Biomedical Engineering
Anagnostopoulou, P., Drigas, A. (2024). Mindfulness, Kindergarten, and Mobile Applications. International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering 
(iJOE) , 20(15), pp. 109–120. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijoe.v2 0i15.51341
Article submitted 2024-07-24. Revision uploaded 2024-09-26.
0i15.51341
Article submitted 2024-07-24. Revision uploaded 2024-09-26. Final acceptance 2024-10-02.
© 2024 by the authors of this article. Published under CC-BY.Online-Journals .org
PAPER
Mindfulness, Kindergarten, and Mobile Applications
ABSTRACT
The following review explores the use of mobile applications in mindfulness practices. 
Also, it examines the fundamental characteristics of mobile applications that might enhance 
their effectiveness. This study is the third and final phase of a
applications that might enhance 
their effectiveness. This study is the third and final phase of a project that aims to investi -
gate the advantages of technology and mindfulness in kindergarten. In the first two parts, 
we examined the use of social robots and virtual reality in mindfulness interventions. 
The objective of this paper is to present existing research on mobile applications and mindful -
ness, evaluate the possible advantages and obstacles of combining these two fields, and also
-
ness, evaluate the possible advantages and obstacles of combining these two fields, and also 
analyze the features of the apps that lead to optimal results. We conducted a bibliographic 
review of articles. The results of our study indicate that mindfulness applications have a sub -
stantial impact on the development of children’s mindfulness abilities, such as their ability 
to regulate attention and manage emotions, while also enhancing their general well-being. 
Advances in mobile
attention and manage emotions, while also enhancing their general well-being. 
Advances in mobile technology provide opportunities to overcome barriers to traditional 
mindfulness training because they are portable devices that are also cost-effective. According 
to our findings, the apps should be age-appropriate, simple, and engaging. However, there is 
limited empirical evidence supporting the efficacy of many available mindfulness apps. We 
need further research to explore and validate their
efficacy of many available mindfulness apps. We 
need further research to explore and validate their effectiveness, especially in comparison to 
traditional in-person interventions.
KEYWORDS
mobile applications, mindfulness, kindergarten
1	 INTRODUCTION
Mindfulness-based interventions (MBIs) are generally known for improving 
well-being and quality of life [1]. “The conscious awareness that arises from inten -
tionally focusing on the present moment, without judgment, while being fully 
engaged
from inten -
tionally focusing on the present moment, without judgment, while being fully 
engaged in the experiences, and maintaining an open and undistracted mind” is 
the typical description of mindfulness [2, 3]. According to multiple studies, MBIs 
seem to improve mental health by reducing symptoms of anxiety, depression, and 
stress. At the same time, they improve emotional regulation. These interventions 
have been associated with changes in the brain’s networks that are responsible for
interventions 
have been associated with changes in the brain’s networks that are responsible for Panagiota 
Anagnostopoulou, 
Athanasios Drigas( )
N.C.S.R. “Demokritos”, 
Athens, Greece
dr@iit.demokritos.grhttps://doi.org/10.3991/ijoe.v20i15.51341 110 International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 15 (2024)
Anagnostopoulou and Drigas
executive functioning [3]. Regular meditation enhances emotional control, attention, 
and cognitive flexibility by fostering
Regular meditation enhances emotional control, attention, 
and cognitive flexibility by fostering neuroplasticity [4].
Children who participated in the mindfulness programs demonstrated better 
academic achievements [5, 6]. Moreno-Gómez and Cejudo’s [6] highlight the impor -
tance of early intervention for the promotion of well-being. Children’s improved 
emotional regulation resulted in better stress and anxiety management. Also, the 
kids developed their social skills, which fostered better
stress and anxiety management. Also, the 
kids developed their social skills, which fostered better peer relationships [5]. 
Several studies emphasize the need to prioritize the implementation of MBIs for 
children [7].
Multiple authors emphasize the importance of integrating mindfulness practices 
into our daily routines because they claim that this aids the intervention’s effective -
ness [8]. However, there are some challenges, like the cost, time limitations, and the 
requirement for
[8]. However, there are some challenges, like the cost, time limitations, and the 
requirement for physical attendance, which prevent individuals from participating 
daily. These obstacles are particularly prevalent among young people and those 
living in rural areas. Christou, Tsermentseli, and Drigas [9] mention that mobile 
games have an important impact on metacognitive skills, such as self-awareness and 
self-regulation, through interactive and adaptable learning experiences. Recently,
and 
self-regulation, through interactive and adaptable learning experiences. Recently, 
there has been a widespread availability of digital platforms for mindfulness train -
ing, such as mobile apps that are based on mindfulness techniques [3].
Drigas, Chaidi, and Papoutsi [10] emphasize the importance of integrating digital 
literacy, emotional intelligence, and adaptive learning methodologies into our teach -
ing methods. Mrazek et al. [11] contend that the digital world plays a crucial role
into our teach -
ing methods. Mrazek et al. [11] contend that the digital world plays a crucial role 
in the future of mindfulness training, providing innovative methods to enhance 
the accessibility and effectiveness of mindfulness. Embracing technology can be a 
catalyst for initiating and sustaining the practice of mindfulness [12].
Today, mindfulness has become very popular. This fact, combined with the wide -
spread use of mobile devices, has led to a rapid increase in mobile applications
with the wide -
spread use of mobile devices, has led to a rapid increase in mobile applications 
specifically designed to provide mindfulness practice to the public [12]. The wide 
availability of mindfulness apps has prompted researchers to investigate the effects 
of fostering mindfulness through digital devices. Using apps for skill development 
has the potential to provide unique, engaging, and interactive learning experiences, 
especially among young individuals.
This paper addresses two
and interactive learning experiences, 
especially among young individuals.
This paper addresses two key research questions: 1) Can mobile applications 
improve mindfulness training in kindergarten, and 2) What are the primary features 
of mobile applications that enhance their effectiveness in mindfulness training? The 
review begins by showcasing the mindfulness techniques and exercises currently 
employed in kindergartens. Next, it provides a series of systematic studies on the 
effects of
employed in kindergartens. Next, it provides a series of systematic studies on the 
effects of mindfulness training on adults and the resulting outcomes. Afterwards, 
it explores the use of mobile applications in kindergartens, and finally, it defines 
the essential characteristics that mobile apps need to have in order to optimize 
their efficacy.
2	 METHOD
This study offers an extensive review of various articles. Our aim was to examine 
the current understanding of the topic and identify
of various articles. Our aim was to examine 
the current understanding of the topic and identify potential gaps in the literature. 
We utilized databases such as Google Scholar, ResearchGate, and Mendeley, includ -
ing only the studies published in English. The review was conducted using keywords 
such as “mobile applications,” “mindfulness,” and “kindergarten.” iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 15 (2024) International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) 111
Mindfulness, Kindergarten, and
International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) 111
Mindfulness, Kindergarten, and Mobile Applications
3	MINDFULNESS	TECHNIQUES	IN	KINDERGARTEN
Mindfulness is more than just meditation, breathing exercises, or relaxation tech -
niques. Meditation aids in the development of mindfulness [13, 14], while mindfulness 
practice incorporates breathing exercises [12]. There are multiple activities specifi -
cally created to foster mindfulness, which improve self-observation,
multiple activities specifi -
cally created to foster mindfulness, which improve self-observation, self-awareness, 
and body awareness [15]. Kabat-Zinn created a course known as mindfulness-based 
stress reduction, teaching individuals’ various techniques to cultivate mindfulness, 
such as focused attention exercises, body scans, breathing exercises, and yoga-based 
activities [16]. An effective technique is to sit in a comfortable position, close the 
eyes, and focus on the breath sensations
technique is to sit in a comfortable position, close the 
eyes, and focus on the breath sensations without trying to control them. Body scan 
meditation involves directing one’s attention to various body areas and observing 
the sensations that are present. Additional techniques encompass engaging in yoga 
with a mindful focus on physical motions and sensations, as well as participating in 
walking meditation [17].
Britton and Sydnor [4] examine two mindfulness techniques that help the
in 
walking meditation [17].
Britton and Sydnor [4] examine two mindfulness techniques that help the 
development of executive functions. Focused attention (FA) is the name of the first 
technique. In this technique, the practitioner deliberately directs and maintains 
attention on a specific thing, like the breath, a visual object, or a sound, while at the 
same time ignoring other stimuli. All the other thoughts, emotions, and body sen -
sations that aren’t the focus of meditation are
All the other thoughts, emotions, and body sen -
sations that aren’t the focus of meditation are considered distractions. On the other 
hand, open-monitoring (OM) practice involves continuously observing all kinds 
of stimuli, like thoughts, emotions, body sensations, and sounds, without actually 
prioritizing any.
Between the ages of three and seven, there is notable development of the 
prefrontal cortex, allowing for the acquisition of advanced cognitive skills such as 
executive functioning,
cortex, allowing for the acquisition of advanced cognitive skills such as 
executive functioning, effortful control, theory of mind, and empathy. These skills 
are essential for self-regulation [18]. Sun et al. [19] conducted a systematic review 
that provided evidence of the potential benefits of yoga and mindfulness in enhanc -
ing social and emotional development in preschool-aged children.
Research has found that mindfulness training enhances the development of 
self-regulation in young
has found that mindfulness training enhances the development of 
self-regulation in young children, encompassing cognitive, emotional, and behavioral 
regulation. Moreover, these programs may provide academic advantages. Research 
indicates that mindfulness training can be especially advantageous for children 
facing additional challenges related to their economic status, home environment, 
temperament, behavior, or cognitive abilities. These children consistently showed 
the most significant
behavior, or cognitive abilities. These children consistently showed 
the most significant improvement from MBI programs [18].
Schools can incorporate meditation practices into their curricula to improve the 
overall well-being and academic performance of students [4]. Shonin, Van Gordon, 
and Griffiths [20] analyze strategies for teaching mindfulness in schools. Firstly, 
the techniques should be age-appropriate, and the sessions must be short. The 
curriculum can incorporate these practices to
age-appropriate, and the sessions must be short. The 
curriculum can incorporate these practices to enhance learning, concentration, and 
emotional control. Finally, it is critical that the activities be both creative and engag -
ing, such as mindful breathing exercises, body scans, or mindful movement activi -
ties like yoga, in order to effectively teach mindfulness skills [20]. The following are 
three studies that implemented mindfulness techniques in kindergarten settings.
Sciutto et al.
are 
three studies that implemented mindfulness techniques in kindergarten settings.
Sciutto et al. [21] investigated the impact of a school-implemented mindful -
ness program on young children. The study introduced a systematic mindfulness 
curriculum in schools that consisted of customized activities and practices specifi -
cally created for young children. The findings showed improvements in children’s 112 International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 15
112 International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 15 (2024)
Anagnostopoulou and Drigas
behavior, including reduced disruptive behaviors and improved social abilities. 
The curriculum included developmentally appropriate tasks such as breathing 
exercises, mindful listening, and guided relaxation, which teachers included in their 
regular routines. The findings indicate that implementing mindfulness programs 
in schools may benefit the school environment and
indicate that implementing mindfulness programs 
in schools may benefit the school environment and promote students’ social and 
emotional growth.
The study by Lee et al. [14] investigated the impact of an intervention combining 
unstructured free play and mindfulness practices on the well-being of kindergarten 
students. Forty-two children aged four to six from Hong Kong participated in the 
study. The intervention consisted of unstructured play, followed by a mindfulness 
intervention lasting
The intervention consisted of unstructured play, followed by a mindfulness 
intervention lasting 10 minutes per day. The study investigated the impact of these 
activities on the emotional, social, and cognitive development of children. The results 
imply that the integration of unstructured play and mindfulness in early childhood 
education is a useful technique that greatly enhances different elements of wellbe -
ing in young children [14].
De Greiff [22] examined the impact of a daily
elements of wellbe -
ing in young children [14].
De Greiff [22] examined the impact of a daily five-minute meditation program in 
a kindergarten classroom. Through this technique, the author saw improvements in 
the children’s focus and behavior. The mindfulness therapies included techniques 
such as present-moment awareness, meditation, physical activation, thankfulness, 
and kindness. Following the intervention, the children’s behavior underwent signif -
icant positive changes: they exhibited
the intervention, the children’s behavior underwent signif -
icant positive changes: they exhibited a calmer demeanor both inside and outside 
the classroom, became kinder to each other, and began to recognize acts of kindness 
around them. This study demonstrated the integration of mindful practices into the 
traditional educational teaching model [22].
4	MOBILE	APPLICATIONS	AND	MINDFULNESS
In this subsection, we present some systematic research and reviews about the 
use of mobile apps in
this subsection, we present some systematic research and reviews about the 
use of mobile apps in mindfulness interventions.
Schwartz, Ganster, and Tran [23] conducted an extensive review of the effec -
tiveness of mindfulness-based mobile applications on the well-being of nonclinical 
populations. According to their review, these applications have a positive impact 
on well-being, stress reduction, emotional regulation, and overall mental health. 
Headspeace is the most popular app among them,
emotional regulation, and overall mental health. 
Headspeace is the most popular app among them, with more than 20 million down -
loads and the highest score on the Mobile Application Rating system [23]. This appli -
cation offers daily guided meditations led by Andy Puddicombe, a former Buddhist 
monk. Studies have shown that using this app can result in several advantages, such 
as enhanced awareness, mindfulness, and well-being [3].
Economides et al. [3] conducted a study to evaluate the
awareness, mindfulness, and well-being [3].
Economides et al. [3] conducted a study to evaluate the potential of a short mind -
fulness intervention offered by Headspace for reducing stress levels, emotional 
effects, and irritation. They assessed the levels of stress and irritation both before 
and after the intervention. The participants were 69 individuals, ranging in age from 
18 to 50 years old. The findings revealed that a brief MBI delivered through the 
application successfully reduced
old. The findings revealed that a brief MBI delivered through the 
application successfully reduced stress and irritation and improved the mood [3].
Flett et al. [24] investigated the efficacy of two commonly utilized mobile mind -
fulness meditation applications, Headspace and Smiling Mind, in comparison to a 
“placebo” application, Evernote, in relation to mental health. They subjected uni -
versity students, aged 18 to 49, to pre- and post-intervention evaluations to assess 
any alterations
students, aged 18 to 49, to pre- and post-intervention evaluations to assess 
any alterations in mental health outcomes. The study revealed that the utilization of iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 15 (2024) International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) 113
Mindfulness, Kindergarten, and Mobile Applications
mindfulness apps had a beneficial effect on mental health, resulting in heightened 
awareness, less depression and anxiety, and enhanced general well-being.
Huberty et al. [25] conducted
less depression and anxiety, and enhanced general well-being.
Huberty et al. [25] conducted a randomized controlled trial to evaluate the 
efficacy of the mindfulness meditation application “Calm” in reducing stress levels 
among college students. The researchers divided the participants into two groups. 
The first group used the “Calm” app, and the second one was the control group. The 
findings of the study indicated that students who utilized the “Calm” application 
exhibited a significant
of the study indicated that students who utilized the “Calm” application 
exhibited a significant decrease in stress levels in comparison to individuals in the 
control group. The study’s findings suggest that mobile applications such as “Calm” 
can be an easily available tool for college students to reduce stress. These apps can 
also be efficient tools in mindfulness training [25].
Duraimani [26] examined if a mobile application for mindfulness meditation can 
reduce stress and anxiety levels
examined if a mobile application for mindfulness meditation can 
reduce stress and anxiety levels in users. The study involved the development of 
a meditation software named “Aware,” which included core training on mindful -
ness meditation practices. They used Kabat-Zinn’s mindfulness meditation to create 
a structured guided session and investigated the immediate impact of using apps on 
participants’ stress and anxiety levels. The results linked the use of the “Aware app” 
to immediate
stress and anxiety levels. The results linked the use of the “Aware app” 
to immediate decreases in stress and anxiety [26].
Golec de Zavala et al. [27] investigated if a mobile-app-supported mindfulness 
training program can provoke changes in the daily mood of the users. The study 
required daily monitoring of the participants to ensure its accuracy. The findings 
indicated overall mood improvements throughout the program. Similarly, Howells 
[28] evaluated the effectiveness of a smartphone
throughout the program. Similarly, Howells 
[28] evaluated the effectiveness of a smartphone app-based application that aimed 
to enhance happiness and well-being. This intervention included activities and exer -
cises such as daily prompts, gratitude exercises, and mindfulness practice. They all 
aimed to boost happiness, cultivate positive emotions, and lessen stress. The study 
found significant improvements in happiness and well-being among participants in 
the intervention group compared to
improvements in happiness and well-being among participants in 
the intervention group compared to those in the control group.
Mitsea, Drigas, and Skianis [29] conducted a comprehensive analysis that specifi -
cally examined the utilization of digitally assisted mindfulness techniques to improve 
self-regulation abilities for the purpose of maintaining long-term mental well-being. 
In their study, they mention SERMO, an AI smartphone application that successfully 
utilized a chatbot to integrate
they mention SERMO, an AI smartphone application that successfully 
utilized a chatbot to integrate mindfulness training and cognitive behavior therapy. 
Its purpose is to assist individuals with mental health issues in managing their emo -
tions and addressing their thoughts and feelings [29]. They also mention Wysa, an AI 
bot that uses empathy and interaction to provide digital mindfulness training. The 
app utilizes written and structured conversations to accurately detect users’ emotions
The 
app utilizes written and structured conversations to accurately detect users’ emotions 
and provide therapeutic self-regulation techniques. The app derives these strategies 
from mindfulness, cognitive behavioral therapy, and positive psychology techniques.
Carissoli, Villani, and Riva [30] studied and evaluated the efficacy of the mobile 
application “It’s time to relax.” 56 Italian workers participated in the study, either as 
an intervention group using the meditation application or as a
participated in the study, either as 
an intervention group using the meditation application or as a control group. The 
study revealed that individuals in the intervention group had a decrease in their 
perceived stress levels. Schultchen et al. [8] conducted a thorough review of mind -
fulness applications that are accessible in European app stores. They created a con -
sistent grading scale to assess the apps based on characteristics like usability, content 
quality, evidence base, and user
assess the apps based on characteristics like usability, content 
quality, evidence base, and user engagement features. The common strengths of 
the apps were user-friendly interfaces, structured mindfulness exercises, and the 
inclusion of tracking and feedback mechanisms. On the other hand, common weak -
nesses included a lack of personalized content and limited scientific evidence of 
effectiveness. 114 International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 15
114 International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 15 (2024)
Anagnostopoulou and Drigas
5	MOBILE	APPLICATIONS	AND	KINDERGARTEN
Early exposure to mobile phones and ICTs has familiarized students with these 
devices [31]. However, it is critical that parents understand the importance of their 
role in fully utilizing digital tools for their own benefit, particularly in enhancing 
emotional and cognitive development [32].
Nunes, Castro, and Limbo [12] evaluated
in enhancing 
emotional and cognitive development [32].
Nunes, Castro, and Limbo [12] evaluated certain mobile mindfulness applica -
tions designed for children. Most of these apps featured audio-based meditation 
exercises, often accompanied by videos. MARS (Mobile Application Rating Scale) is 
a tool that assesses engagement, functionality, aesthetics, and information quality. 
So, according to their findings, despite generally achieving an “acceptable” level of 
quality, most apps did not
to their findings, despite generally achieving an “acceptable” level of 
quality, most apps did not score well across all dimensions of the MARS [8]. Nunes, 
Castro, and Limpo [12] highlighted the most downloaded and highest-rated apps in 
their study. As previously mentioned, Headspace remains the most downloaded and 
extensively researched mobile application. Here, we will provide a brief overview 
of several other popular mindfulness apps for kids.
•	GoNoodle – Kid Movement and Mindfulness
of several other popular mindfulness apps for kids.
•	GoNoodle – Kid Movement and Mindfulness Videos: Its goal is to promote 
physical activity among children by encouraging them to move throughout the 
day. It offers videos and free activities specifically targeting young students.
•	Mindfulness with Petit BamBou: guided meditation and breathing exercises
•	Align Mindfulness: This app sends brief prompts as notifications. Once the user 
receives this message, he has the option to choose how to
prompts as notifications. Once the user 
receives this message, he has the option to choose how to proceed. For instance, 
he can write a response or just take a moment to reflect on the prompt before 
continuing. The goal of the app is to focus on the present moment.
•	Cosmic Kids Yoga: guided yoga lessons tailored for children aged three years 
and older.
•	Serenity: Guided meditation offered a range of mindfulness techniques 
categorized into various levels of difficulty [12].
Unfortunately,
range of mindfulness techniques 
categorized into various levels of difficulty [12].
Unfortunately, we didn’t find systematic reviews evaluating the effectiveness of 
the above applications.
Nicolaidou et al. [33] aimed to assess if a gamified application specifically 
designed for children can actually help them manage their stress. The name of the 
app is “Kids’ Stress Relief,” and the current version includes five short stories. The 
main goal of these stories is to help children recognize
version includes five short stories. The 
main goal of these stories is to help children recognize and understand emotions 
such as happiness, sadness, and anger. It also aims to teach them effective anger 
management, empathy, and the recognition of physical signs of stress. Additionally, 
it emphasizes in teaching strategies for dealing with stress from common stress -
ors, such as test anxiety, fear of thunderstorms, and meeting new people. The study 
found that children under the age of
fear of thunderstorms, and meeting new people. The study 
found that children under the age of seven interacted with the breathing exercises 
passively, following instructions without actively participating in the stress-relieving 
techniques intended by the app developers [33].
Treves et al. [34] investigated the impact of a mobile application-based mind -
fulness intervention at home on children’s well-being. The study conducted a 
comparison between the results of youngsters who utilized the
well-being. The study conducted a 
comparison between the results of youngsters who utilized the mindfulness 
application and those who engaged in alternative active control activities. The 
findings indicated that children who used the mindfulness app showed signifi -
cant improvements in emotional regulation, concentration, and stress reduction 
compared to the control group [34]. In general, it seems that there is room for iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 15 (2024) International Journal of Online and
it seems that there is room for iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 15 (2024) International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) 115
Mindfulness, Kindergarten, and Mobile Applications
improvement in the current mindfulness applications developed specifically for 
children [12].
6	MOBILE	APPLICATIONS	ADVANTAGES	AND	CHARACTERISTICS
6.1	 Advantages
Mobile devices facilitate the efficient and successful implementation of digital 
technology in education, allowing for the execution of evaluation,
implementation of digital 
technology in education, allowing for the execution of evaluation, intervention, 
and educational procedures in any location [35]. Introducing a digital approach to 
mindfulness training has the potential to offer several benefits, such as improved 
accessibility, standardization, individualization, and effectiveness [11]. Research 
findings suggest that we can scale mindfulness interventions delivered via mobile 
apps to reach a wider audience, providing mental health
interventions delivered via mobile 
apps to reach a wider audience, providing mental health support in situations 
where in-person sessions are impractical [2]. They also indicate that mobile app-
based interventions are easily accessible and cost-effective [2], offering systematic 
and proactive education to the general public, thus overcoming economic and social 
barriers [36].
By integrating audio and visual information, technology-based mindfulness 
training appears to assist children and
audio and visual information, technology-based mindfulness 
training appears to assist children and adolescents in better grasping abstract con -
cepts related to practicing mindfulness strategies [12]. Compared to traditional face-
to-face settings, using apps is more cost-effective and requires fewer resources. 
Furthermore, the portability of mobile devices allows users to participate in mindful -
ness practice at any location and at any time [12]. Mobile applications are also more
in mindful -
ness practice at any location and at any time [12]. Mobile applications are also more 
captivating and require less time [3]. These resources enable flexibility in terms of 
their usage time and location, have broad accessibility, have reminder functional -
ities, and offer additional materials such as images and videos [8].
6.2	 Limitations
However, mindfulness applications have several limitations, including insuffi -
cient data protection and privacy features, as well as consent
limitations, including insuffi -
cient data protection and privacy features, as well as consent issues. Furthermore, it 
is necessary to investigate the efficacy of teaching stress relief techniques to children 
aged four to 12 exclusively through the use of apps without any prior involvement 
from instructors or parents [33]. Although young children may quickly become 
proficient in using technology, they often face difficulties such as unintentionally 
swiping, tapping incorrectly, or
technology, they often face difficulties such as unintentionally 
swiping, tapping incorrectly, or mistakenly exiting the application. As a result, par -
ents or caregivers must supervise their use of technology [12]. According to Chaidi 
et al. [1], it is advantageous to use hybrid models that integrate both in-person and 
telehealth sessions.
6.3	Recommended	features
It’s important to point out that mobile application use generally declines within 
the first 90 days of installation [25].
out that mobile application use generally declines within 
the first 90 days of installation [25]. Hence, we thought it was imperative to include 
in our study a few guidelines for future mindfulness-app designers.
Firstly, mindfulness interventions designed for children require clear instructions 
and short activities; they should incorporate metaphors and images; they should use 116 International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 15 (2024)
Anagnostopoulou
Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 15 (2024)
Anagnostopoulou and Drigas
movement-based exercises; and they should offer a balance of silent, inquiry-based, 
and interactive activities. Designing apps for children also necessitates specific 
usability considerations [12], such as avoiding excessive navigation, scrolling, and 
advertisements, employing simple actions, incorporating animations and sounds, 
using age-appropriate and interactive designs, and
actions, incorporating animations and sounds, 
using age-appropriate and interactive designs, and ensuring entertainment value.
Furthermore, timers, reminders, meditation guides, and relaxation exercises 
can augment both the level of involvement and the efficacy of mindfulness prac -
tice [17, 23]. Studies indicate that these functions frequently result in higher user 
ratings [8]. In addition, it is essential for mindfulness applications to provide a clear 
and comprehensive explanation of the
is essential for mindfulness applications to provide a clear 
and comprehensive explanation of the theory and techniques of mindfulness while 
also addressing prevalent misunderstandings [17, 37].
In the end, applications should encourage regular use and create a sense of 
confidence in users. Currently, there is a lack of applications specifically tailored for 
professionals or individuals who participate in long-term meditation. Lastly, devel -
oping applications in languages other than
who participate in long-term meditation. Lastly, devel -
oping applications in languages other than English can enhance accessibility for 
non-English-speaking users [37].
7	RESULTS	AND	DISCUSSION
This paper aims to address two research questions:
1. Can mobile applications improve mindfulness training in kindergarten?
2. What are the primary features of mobile applications that enhance their effec -
tiveness in mindfulness training?
The literature review reveals that well-designed mindfulness
-
tiveness in mindfulness training?
The literature review reveals that well-designed mindfulness applications signifi -
cantly enhance children’s mindfulness abilities. This includes improving their atten -
tion regulation, managing their emotions, and overall well-being. The use of mobile 
applications for mindfulness practice is becoming more widespread. Similarly, 
research has shown that adults who receive mindfulness training through mobile 
apps experience improvements in their quality of
who receive mindfulness training through mobile 
apps experience improvements in their quality of life, self-reported mindfulness, 
and depression symptoms reduction. The latest progress in mobile app technology 
presents a favorable chance to address several obstacles linked to traditional mind -
fulness training. Moreover, the portability of mobile phones might alleviate geo -
graphical, social, and economic barriers to access.
Regarding our second research question, it is essential to create
and economic barriers to access.
Regarding our second research question, it is essential to create age-appropriate 
and engaging digital content for mindfulness if our aim is to maximize its effective -
ness and appeal. Only by customizing the content and aligning it with the children’s 
developmental stages and interests will the mindfulness apps catch their attention 
and, therefore, maintain it. Based on this study’s findings, we propose the following 
recommendations for future mindfulness
it. Based on this study’s findings, we propose the following 
recommendations for future mindfulness apps:
1. The app should provide the theoretical basis and explanations for mindfulness.
2. Prioritize robust data protection measures and ensure a child-friendly interface 
that avoids distractions like advertisements.
3. The instructions must be simple, easy to follow, and the activities short.
4. The design is easy to navigate, attractive, user-friendly, and age-targeting.
5. Simple actions and
The design is easy to navigate, attractive, user-friendly, and age-targeting.
5. Simple actions and animations, engaging visuals, and interactive features all con -
tribute to entertaining elements. iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 15 (2024) International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) 117
Mindfulness, Kindergarten, and Mobile Applications
6. There should be reminders for practice and progress tracking features.
7. Develop apps in multiple languages to reach diverse populations.
The
progress tracking features.
7. Develop apps in multiple languages to reach diverse populations.
The purpose of these proposals is to improve the design and features of future 
mindfulness applications, with the aim of making them more effective tools for pro -
moting mindfulness in children. Moreover, these characteristics enhance the app’s 
appeal, thereby raising the probability of consistent usage and long-term benefits.
8	 CONCLUSIONS
Mindfulness can improve concentration, emotional control,
and long-term benefits.
8	 CONCLUSIONS
Mindfulness can improve concentration, emotional control, and overall psycho -
logical well-being. Previous research has demonstrated that therapies using mobile 
technology in real-time have successfully improved health outcomes in different 
areas, including anxiety and stress management. Mobile applications have the abil -
ity to promote a healthy lifestyle, hence facilitating the implementation of more 
personalized therapies. Mindfulness-focused apps
hence facilitating the implementation of more 
personalized therapies. Mindfulness-focused apps have the potential to improve 
mindfulness skills and support the emotional development of children. Using mobile 
applications to provide structured interventions can increase the accessibility of 
mindfulness programs to young people living in rural areas, who may otherwise 
have limited access.
The research on the efficacy of mobile applications that use mindfulness prac -
tices is currently in its
on the efficacy of mobile applications that use mindfulness prac -
tices is currently in its early stages. Although there are numerous mindfulness appli -
cations available, a significant number of them lack empirical data to support their 
effectiveness. Thus, although it provides a cost-effective alternative to traditional 
mindfulness training, it is important to be cautious due to the low amount of sup -
porting evidence. Although there is a large range of mindfulness apps available, 
their
of sup -
porting evidence. Although there is a large range of mindfulness apps available, 
their quality and usefulness might differ significantly. Digital interventions via apps 
are assumed to be advantageous; however, few studies compare their effectiveness 
with face-to-face interventions in children, and little is known about children’s abil -
ity to independently use mindfulness apps effectively.
9	 REFERENCES
 [1] N. Chadi, E. Weisbaum, D. X. Vo, and S. Ahola Kohut, “Mindfulness-based
REFERENCES
 [1] N. Chadi, E. Weisbaum, D. X. Vo, and S. Ahola Kohut, “Mindfulness-based interventions 
for adolescents: Time to consider telehealth,” J. Altern. Complement. Med. , vol. 26, no. 3, 
pp. 172–175, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1089/acm .2019.0302
 [2] A. Golec de Zavala, O. Keenan, M. Ziegler, P. Ciesielski, J. E. Wahl, and M. Mazurkiewicz, 
“App-based mindfulness training supported eudaimonic wellbeing during the COVID19 
pandemic,” Appl. Psychol. Heal. Well-Being , vol. 16, no. 1, pp.
wellbeing during the COVID19 
pandemic,” Appl. Psychol. Heal. Well-Being , vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 42–59, 2024. https://doi.
org/10.1111/ aphw.12468
 [3] M. Economides, J. Martman, M. J. Bell, and B. Sanderson, “Improvements in stress, 
affect, and irritability following brief use of a mindfulness-based smartphone app: 
A randomized controlled trial,” Mindfulness , vol. 9, pp. 1584–1593, 2018. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12671- 018-0905-4
 [4] W. Britton and A. Sydnor, “Neurobiological models of
018-0905-4
 [4] W. Britton and A. Sydnor, “Neurobiological models of meditation practices: Implications 
for applications with youth,” in Teaching Mindfulness Skills to Kids and Teens , C. Willard 
and A. Saltzman, Eds., New York: The Guilford Press, 2015, pp. 402–414. 118 International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 15 (2024)
Anagnostopoulou and Drigas
 [5] A. Moreno-Gómez, P. Luna, and J. Cejudo, “Promoting school success through 
mindfulness-based
[5] A. Moreno-Gómez, P. Luna, and J. Cejudo, “Promoting school success through 
mindfulness-based interventions in early childhood,” Rev. Psicodidáctica , vol. 25, no. 2, 
pp. 136–142, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psicoe.2 019.12.001
 [6] A. J. Moreno-Gómez and J. Cejudo, “Effectiveness of a mindfulness-based social–
Emotional learning program on psychosocial adjustment and neuropsychological 
maturity in kindergarten children,” Mindfulness , vol. 10, pp. 111–121, 2019.
neuropsychological 
maturity in kindergarten children,” Mindfulness , vol. 10, pp. 111–121, 2019. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12671- 018-0956-6
 [7] N. N. Singh and S. D. S. Joy, “Mindfulness-based interventions with children and 
adolescents,” in Mindfulness-based Interventions with Children and Adolescents . London: 
Routledge, 2021, pp. 3–9. https://doi.org/10.4324/97813 15563862-2
 [8] D. Schultchen et al., “Stay present with your phone: A systematic review and standardized 
rating of
D. Schultchen et al., “Stay present with your phone: A systematic review and standardized 
rating of mindfulness apps in European app stores,” Int. J. Behav. Med., vol. 28, 
pp. 552–560, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12529-0 20-09944-y
 [9] A. I. Christou, S. Tsermentseli, and A. Drigas, “The role of mobile games and environmental 
factors in improving learning and metacognitive potential of young students,” Int. J. 
Interact. Mob. Technol . (iJIM) , vol. 17, no. 18, pp. 67–84, 2023.
of young students,” Int. J. 
Interact. Mob. Technol . (iJIM) , vol. 17, no. 18, pp. 67–84, 2023. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijim.
v17i18.42437
 [10] A. Drigas, I. Chaidi, and C. Papoutsi, “The teacher of the future,” Int. J. Emerg. Technol. 
Learn. (iJET) , vol. 18, no. 16, pp. 87–114, 2023. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v1 8i16.36169
 [11] A. J. Mrazek et al., “The future of mindfulness training is digital, and the future is now,” 
Curr. Opin. Psychol ., vol. 28, pp. 81–86, 2019.
training is digital, and the future is now,” 
Curr. Opin. Psychol ., vol. 28, pp. 81–86, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2 018.11.012
 [12] A. Nunes, S. L. Castro, and T. Limpo, “A review of mindfulness-based apps for children,” 
Mindfulness , vol. 11, pp. 2089–2101, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12671-0 20-01410-w
 [13] M. F. Perrier, N. Gurgel-Juarez, H. L. Flowers, A. McCormick, and S. J. Short, “Mindfulness-
based interventions for children and adolescents across all settings: A
S. J. Short, “Mindfulness-
based interventions for children and adolescents across all settings: A scoping review 
protocol,” Syst. Rev ., vol. 9, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-0 20-01548-7
 [14] R. L. T. Lee et al., “Effects of an unstructured free play and mindfulness intervention on 
wellbeing in kindergarten students,” Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health , vol. 17, no. 15, 
p. 5382, 2020. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijer ph17155382
 [15] I. Moraiti, A. Fotoglou, and A. Drigas,
5382, 2020. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijer ph17155382
 [15] I. Moraiti, A. Fotoglou, and A. Drigas, “Mindfulness training – effect on adults with ADHD 
and depressive symptoms and the role of digital technologies,” J. Heal. Technol. – JHT , 
vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1–18, 2023. https://doi.org/10.47820/j ht.v2i3.39
 [16] J. Laurie and A. Blandford, “Making time for mindfulness,” Int. J. Med. Inform ., vol. 96, 
pp. 38–50, 2016. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2 016.02.010
 [17] M. Mani, D. J.
., vol. 96, 
pp. 38–50, 2016. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2 016.02.010
 [17] M. Mani, D. J. Kavanagh, L. Hides, and S. R. Stoyanov, “Review and evaluation of 
mindfulness-based iPhone apps,” JMIR mHealth uHealth , vol. 3, no. 3, p. e82, 2015. 
https://doi.org/10.2196/mh ealth.4328
 [18] J. O. Bockmann and S. Y. Yu, “Using mindfulness-based interventions to support 
self-regulation in young children: A review of the literature,” Early Childhood Education 
Journal , vol. 51, pp. 693–703,
children: A review of the literature,” Early Childhood Education 
Journal , vol. 51, pp. 693–703, 2023. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10643-0 22-01333-2
 [19] Y. Sun, R. Lamoreau, S. O’Connell, R. Horlick, and A. N. Bazzano, “Yoga and mindfulness 
interventions for preschool-aged children in educational settings: A systematic review,” 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health , vol. 18, no. 11, p. 6091, 
2021. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijer ph18116091
 [20] E. Shonin, W. Van
, vol. 18, no. 11, p. 6091, 
2021. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijer ph18116091
 [20] E. Shonin, W. Van Gordon, and M. D. Griffiths, “Practical tips for teaching mindful -
ness to children and adolescents in school-based settings,” Educ. Heal., vol. 32, no. 2, 
pp. 69–72, 2014.
 [21] M. J. Sciutto, D. A. Veres, T. L. Marinstein, B. F. Bailey, and S. K. Cehelyk, “Effects of a 
school-based mindfulness program for young children,” J. Child Fam. Stud. , vol. 30, 
pp. 1516–1527, 2021.
mindfulness program for young children,” J. Child Fam. Stud. , vol. 30, 
pp. 1516–1527, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10826-0 21-01955-x iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 15 (2024) International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) 119
Mindfulness, Kindergarten, and Mobile Applications
 [22] I. E. A. de Greiff, “Using mindful classroom strategies to improve behavior and cogni -
tive development in kindergarten students,” in Mindful Learning: Research on Learner 
Awareness, Metacognition, and
in kindergarten students,” in Mindful Learning: Research on Learner 
Awareness, Metacognition, and Learning Strategies Voices from the Field: Research from the 
Specialist Program in Bilingual Education , J. Taylor, Ed., Bogotá: Institución Universitaria 
Colombo Americana – ÚNICA, 2020, pp. 214–230.
 [23] K. Schwartz, F. M. Ganster, and U. S. Tran, “Mindfulness-based mobile apps and their 
impact on well-being in nonclinical populations: Systematic review of randomized con -
trolled trials,” J.
on well-being in nonclinical populations: Systematic review of randomized con -
trolled trials,” J. Med. Internet Res ., vol. 25, p. e44638, 2023. https://doi.org/10. 2196/44638
 [24] J. A. M. Flett, H. Hayne, B. C. Riordan, L. M. Thompson, and T. S. Conner, “Mobile mind -
fulness meditation: A randomised controlled trial of the effect of two popular apps 
on mental health,” Mindfulness , vol. 10, pp. 863–876, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12671- 018-1050-9
 [25] J. Huberty, J. Green, C.
10, pp. 863–876, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12671- 018-1050-9
 [25] J. Huberty, J. Green, C. Glissmann, L. Larkey, M. Puzia, and C. Lee, “Efficacy of the 
mindfulness meditation mobile app ‘calm’ to reduce stress among college students: 
Randomized controlled trial,” JMIR mHealth uHealth , vol. 7, no. 6, p. e14273, 2019. https://
doi.org/10. 2196/14273
 [26] S. Duraimani, “A cross-sectional and longitudinal study of the effects of a mindfulness 
meditation mobile application platform on
and longitudinal study of the effects of a mindfulness 
meditation mobile application platform on reducing stress and anxiety,” Int. J. Yoga , 
vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 226–232, 2019. https://doi.org/10.4103/ijoy. IJOY_56_18
 [27] A. Golec de Zavala, C. Förster, M. Ziegler, M. Nalberczak-Skóra, P. Ciesielski, and 
M. Mazurkiewicz, “The shape of the change: Cumulative and incremental changes in 
daily mood during mobile-app-supported mindfulness training,” Appl. Psychol. Heal. 
Well-Being , vol. 18,
mood during mobile-app-supported mindfulness training,” Appl. Psychol. Heal. 
Well-Being , vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1122–1140, 2024. https://doi.org/10.1111/ aphw.12518
 [28] A. Howells, I. Ivtzan, and F. J. Eiroa-Orosa, “Putting the ‘app’ in happiness: A ran -
domised controlled trial of a smartphone-based mindfulness intervention to enhance 
wellbeing,” Journal of Happiness Studies , vol. 17, pp. 163–185, 2016. https: //doi.org/ 
10.1007/s10902- 014-9589-1
 [29] E. Mitsea, A. Drigas, and C.
pp. 163–185, 2016. https: //doi.org/ 
10.1007/s10902- 014-9589-1
 [29] E. Mitsea, A. Drigas, and C. Skianis, “Digitally assisted mindfulness in training 
self-regulation skills for sustainable mental health: A systematic review,” Behav. Sci., 
vol. 13, no. 12, p. 1008, 2023. https://doi.org/10.3390/ bs13121008
 [30] C. Carissoli, D. Villani, and G. Riva, “Does a meditation protocol supported by a mobile 
application help people reduce stress? Suggestions from a controlled pragmatic trial,”
by a mobile 
application help people reduce stress? Suggestions from a controlled pragmatic trial,” 
Cyberpsychology, Behav. Soc. Netw ., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 46–53, 2015. https://doi.org/10.1089/
cyber .2014.0062
 [31] V. Galitskaya and A. S. Drigas, “Mobiles & ICT based interventions for learning difficulties 
in geometry,” Int. J. Eng. Pedagog ., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 21–36, 2023. https://doi.org/10.3991/
ijep.v 13i4.36309
 [32] A. Drigas, M. Karyotaki, and C. Skianis, “Mobiles, digital tech,
13i4.36309
 [32] A. Drigas, M. Karyotaki, and C. Skianis, “Mobiles, digital tech, empathy, metacognition, 
self-consciousness and the role of parents in schools and societies of the future,” Int. 
J. Interact. Mob. Technol ., vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 118–132, 2023. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijim.
v17i07.37201
 [33] I. Nicolaidou, F. Tozzi, P. Kindynis, M. Panayiotou, and A. Antoniades, “Development and 
usability of a gamified app to help children manage stress: An evaluation study,” Ital. J. 
Educ.
usability of a gamified app to help children manage stress: An evaluation study,” Ital. J. 
Educ. Technol ., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 105–120, 2019. https://doi.org/10.17471/2499 -4324/1050
 [34] I. N. Treves et al ., “At-home use of app-based mindfulness for children: A randomized 
active-controlled trial,” Mindfulnes , vol. 14, pp. 2728–2744, 2023. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12671-0 23-02231-3
 [35] A. M. Driga, A. Zavitsanou, and A. Drigas, “Negative impacts of 15 white foods on health 
and brain
A. M. Driga, A. Zavitsanou, and A. Drigas, “Negative impacts of 15 white foods on health 
and brain and the role of mobiles in healthy living education,” J. Heal. Technol. – JHT , 
vol. 2, no. 2, p. e2235, 2023. https://doi.org/10.47820/j ht.v2i2.35 120 International Journal of Online and Biomedical Engineering (iJOE) iJOE | Vol. 20 No. 15 (2024)
Anagnostopoulou and Drigas
 [36] M. Karyotaki, A. Drigas, and C. Skianis, “Mobile/VR/Robotics/IoT-based chatbots and 
intelligent personal assistants
Drigas, and C. Skianis, “Mobile/VR/Robotics/IoT-based chatbots and 
intelligent personal assistants for social inclusion,” Int. J. Interact. Mob. Technol. , vol. 18, 
no. 8, pp. 40–51, 2024. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijim.v1 8i08.46473
 [37] I. Plaza, M. M. P. Demarzo, P. Herrera-Mercadal, and J. García-Campayo, “Mindfulness-
based mobile applications: Literature review and analysis of current features,” JMIR 
mHealth uHealth , vol. 1, no. 2, p. e24, 2013. https://doi.org/10.2196/mh ealth.2733
10
JMIR 
mHealth uHealth , vol. 1, no. 2, p. e24, 2013. https://doi.org/10.2196/mh ealth.2733
10	 AUTHORS
Panagiota Anagnostopoulou is with N.C.S.R. “Demokritos,” I.I.T, Net Media 
Lab & Mind-Brain R&D, Agia Paraskevi, 153 10, Athens, Greece (E-mail: italgiota@
gmail.com ).
Athanasios Drigas is a Research Director at N.C.S.R. “Demokritos,” I.I.T, Net 
Media Lab & Mind-Brain R&D, Agia Paraskevi, 153 10, Athens, Greece (E-mail: dr@
iit.demok ritos.gr ).
Lab & Mind-Brain R&D, Agia Paraskevi, 153 10, Athens, Greece (E-mail: dr@
iit.demok ritos.gr ). Copyright
of
International
Journal
of
Online
&
Biomedical
Engineering
is
the
property
of
International
Journal
of
Online
Engineering
and
its
content
may
not
be
copied
or
emailed
to
multiple
sites
or
posted
to
a
listserv
without
the
copyright
holder's
express
written
permission.
However,
users
may
print,
download,
or
email
articles
for
individual
use.
